Are Science and God Incompatible?

A barrage of recent books, newspaper and magazine articles, videos, public lectures, and even a widely-viewed documentary will have you think that science has by now disproved the existence of God. And some of the people making these claims are well-known scientists, such as the British biologist Richard Dawkins, who has made a career of arguing that modern science makes religion obsolete. But in fact, these pronouncements are premature, and the last time that science won decisively against religion was as far back as the 19th century.

Starting in 1829 and continuing throughout the 1800s, discoveries of Neanderthal remains in Belgium, Gibraltar, and Germany have shown that humans were not the only hominids to occupy Earth, lending strong support to the then-emerging theory of evolution. Published by Charles Darwin in 1859, evolution dealt a deadly blow to creationism—the belief that organisms were created, rather than evolved from lower animals. And in 1851, Leon Foucault, a self-trained French physicist, proved definitively that the Earth rotates—rather than staying in place as the Sun went around it, as might be inferred from Scripture—using a special pendulum he had devised, now named after him, whose circular motion caused by the Earth’s rotation he demonstrated dramatically to a large audience in Paris. Equally, geological discoveries made over the same century dealt a death knell to the “young earth” theory. We now know that the Earth is billions—not thousands—of years old, as some had thought by counting generations back to the Biblical Adam. All of these discoveries devastated literal interpretations of Scripture: that the Earth and its plants, animals, and humans were all created over six days, a few score generations ago, and that the Sun rotates around a static Earth, viewed as the center of all creation.

But has modern science proved that there is no God, as some scientists are now claiming? The answer is a resounding no! Science is a wonderful undertaking: it teaches us about life, the world, and the universe. And it has brought us immense amounts of information: Human knowledge is said to double every few years. But none of it has so far disproved the existence of some kind of supreme force that exists outside our universe—a force some people choose to call God.

Since the beginning of the 20th century, with the formulation of Einstein’s theories of relativity, as well as quantum mechanics and quantum field theory, progressing hand-in-hand with experimentation in extremely powerful particle accelerators such as CERN’s Large Hadron Collider (LHC), we have discovered much about the physical universe. Through these massive experiments, buttressed by theoretical calculations, we have learned what happened even a tiny fraction of a second after the Big Bang. But paradoxically, what we’ve learned only provokes new questions, raises new mysteries, and makes us wonder: What caused it all?

We know that 13.7 billion years ago, an immense burst of energy, whose nature and source are completely unknown, launched our universe. The “God particle”—the Higgs boson discovered two years ago in the LHC, causing great excitement in scientific circles—came into being closely after the Big Bang and miraculously gave itself and other primeval particles mass. This mass would mysteriously bunch together in just the right way to make stars, planets, living creatures, and ultimately conscious, sentient humans wondering about where they came from. The mechanism that formed the universe is so precise, so complex, so incredibly fine-tuned and highly improbable, that it begs the question of the existence of a supreme intelligence that brought it all into being. Based on only one of the many parameters of a life-giving universe, the probability that such a cosmos would appear by chance is much smaller than that of winning the jackpot in the Mega Millions lottery on every single day for more days than the age of the universe.

On planet Earth, condensed from clouds of matter created in earlier stars, primitive life forms emerged through a process we have absolutely no understanding of and could never replicate in the lab. Many millions of years later, complicated eukaryotic cells came into being—far more complicated and intricate in structure than the earliest cells. These had a nucleus, in which the information-bearing DNA molecule plays a role. They could replicate, and they evolved into more advanced creatures as the millennia passed. And then finally intelligent, thinking beings came into the world, creating language and art and music and science and technology and law and architecture and philosophy and mathematics. Could all of this have emerged by chance out of sheer nothingness? The probability of it all is extremely close to zero.