9 Magic Words Prove Vaccines Are Unavoidably Unsafe.

Have you ever asked your doctor about the safety of vaccines, only to have your concerns dismissed? If so, you’re not alone.

Doctors are quick to tell you there is nothing to worry about. They are quick to say something like, “The chance of your child having a bad reaction is one in a million.”

This is really incredible, since toxic vaccines are manufactured using monkey kidneys, mouse brains, fetal calf serum, and even aborted babies (human diploid cells). But as much as a doctor would like to dismiss your concerns, there is a magic question you can ask which will prove to you that vaccines are unavoidably unsafe. If you read the entire article, I promise it will be worth it.

Before I tell you the magic question, you should be aware of how the government handles unsafe products.

Here Is How the Government Handles Unsafe Products:

To get a feel for how protected dangerous vaccines are from any scrutiny from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), let’s take a look at how they respond to other instances in which people fall ill or die from products they deem to be unsafe.

1. Contaminated Heparin Injections (2-28-2008): The FDA investigated all of Baxter Pharmaceuticals Healthcare Corporation’s multi-dose and single-dose vials of heparin sodium for injection, as well as HEP-LOCK heparin flush product, for adverse reactions. 246 deaths and many adverse side effects were reported following its use. [1]

Result: Product Recalled.

2. Contaminated Cantaloupe (8-22-2012): The FDA and CDC investigated a multi-state outbreak of salmonella infections linked to cantaloupe originating from Chamberlain Farms Produce, Inc. 261 persons were infected with 3 deaths reported. [2]

Result: Product Recalled.

3. Contaminated Peanut Butter (9-17-2012): The FDA and CDC investigated a multi-state outbreak of salmonella infections linked to Trader Joe’s Valencia Creamy Salted Peanut Butter, made by Sunland, Inc. Forty-two people were infected. [3]

Result: Product Recalled.

4. Contaminated Spinach (11-2-2012): A total of 33 persons infected with E. coli were investigated by the FDA and CDC. It was traced back to Wegmans Organic Spinach and Spring Mix. [4]

Result: Product Recalled.

5. Contaminated Steroid Injections (12-12-2012): The FDA and CDC investigated an outbreak of meningitis among patients who had received an epidural steroid injection. [5]

Result: Product Recalled.

There are many examples of how the FDA and CDC operate, and some people even say this is proof that “the system” works. To a degree, the system does work—but contaminated vaccines are untouchable.

Here’s what you need to know.

Are Vaccines Contaminated? Well … Yes.

Vaccines have a long history of being filthy and contaminated.

This problem has been going on for a very long time and continues today. This is why it’s important for you to recognize how the vaccine industry has crafted specific language around vaccines and the manufacturing process using such words as “purified,” “purification process,” “lifesaving,” and “safe.” If you listen closely, you will hear doctors repeat the same language over and over to parents. The intention is to disarm you from asking questions.

I want to share this information with you so you can get a sense for how long this problem has been ignored.

A Cancer-Causing Monkey Virus Contaminated Vaccines?

In the 1950s and 1960s, the polio vaccine was manufactured using monkey kidneys to grow the viruses.

Bernice Eddy, who at the time was a scientist at the Division of Biologics Standards (DBS), discovered a major problem. Page 500 of the Executive Reorganization and Government Research of the Committee on Government Operations United States Senate, Ninety-Second Congress, Second Session. April 20, 21; and May 3, 4, 1972, states:

“The next and only serious vaccine crisis that has occurred since the polio episode was the realization in mid-1961 that a monkey virus later shown to cause tumors in hamsters was contaminating both polio and adenovirus vaccines. The virus, known as SV40, was entering the vaccines and, just as in the polio case was surviving the formalin [form of formaldehyde] treatment.

There were several states by which the full extent of the SV40 problem became known. First was the discovery in 1959-1960 by a DBS [Division of Biologics Standards] scientist, once again Bernice Eddy, that an unknown agent in the monkey kidney cells used to produce polio and adenovirus vaccines would cause tumors when the cells were injected into hamsters.” [6](Emphasis mine)

Page 505 of the same congressional document declares,

“…even when the contaminating virus was found to be oncogenic [cancer causing] in hamsters, the DBS [Division of Biologics Standards – National Institute of Health] and its expert advisory committee decided to leave existing stocks on the market rather than risk eroding public confidence by a recall…There has been a tendency on the part of certain higher government circles to play down any open discussion of problems associated with vaccines…” (Emphasis mine)

Even to this day, the Centers for Disease Control plays damage control and minimizes any problems associated with the cancer-causing monkey virus that contaminated the polio vaccine. [7]

There’s more.

Phages Contaminated Vaccines?

In February, 1975 Gina Bari Kolata wrote an article entitled “Phage in Live Virus Vaccines: Are They Harmful to People?” Gina Bari Kolata wrote:

Almost 2 years ago, scientists at the Bureau of Biologics of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) reported that all live virus vaccines are grossly contaminated with phage (viruses that infect bacteria). . . This finding presented a problem since federal regulations forbade extraneous material in vaccines, and no one knew whether phage are harmful to human beings or whether they could be removed from vaccines. The temporary solution was to amend the regulations so as to permit phage in vaccines. [8] [emphasis mine]

Where did the bacteriophage come from?

According to the article, the phages, which are viruses that infect bacteria, contaminate the “fetal bovine serum” collected at the slaughterhouse that subsequently is used as vaccine growth medium. The filthy process of bovine “fetus management” was encapsulated in this manner:

The room is dirty and, according to one spokesman, “one minute you have nothing to do and the next minute you are literally knee deep in fetuses.” [8]

Kolata noted that one unintended consequence from the contamination was the phage’s ability to trigger a different disease. She explained that a person who was given the polio vaccine contaminated with diphtheria phage could actually contract diphtheria!

FDA’s tolerance of vaccine contaminants manifested years later. For example, a court case decided in 1987 revealed, “Each seed virus used in manufacture shall be demonstrated to be free of extraneous microbial agents except for unavoidable bacteriophage.” [9]

It Continues to This Day.

This isn’t a problem that magically went away.

Bovine serum is frequently used as a growth medium as a part of the vaccine manufacturing process. It has been the major source of contamination in vaccines. [10] The most prevailing bovine contaminants are:

• bovine viral diarrhoea pestivirus
• parainfluenza virus type 3
• bovine herpesvirus 1
• bovine enterovirus type 4
• bovine orbivirus (bluetongue)
• bovine polyomavirus
• bovine parvoviruses [10, 11]

One paper suggests that vaccines contaminated with the bluetongue virus caused abortions in pregnant dogs. [12]

There are also patents to detect “new” pathogens that are likely contaminating other cell cultures to make flu vaccines. [13]

And to bring this full circle to the beginning of the article . . .

Contaminated Vaccines (1952–Today): The scientific literature has an abundance of evidence that vaccines are contaminated. The FDA and CDC have access to the very same information contained in this article—and much more. Vaccines are kept on the shelves even if they are contaminated because, if recalled, your confidence in vaccine safety and effectiveness would be eroded.

Result: Product Stays on the Shelf.

Here is the magic 9-word question I promised you in the beginning of the article.

The 9 Magic Words:

Here’s what I want you to do.

The next time you visit your doctor, after your doctor is done telling you how safe vaccines are, ask him this question with the 9 magic words: “If this vaccine injures my child, who is responsible?”

Your doctor will likely blush, get angry with you, or avoid the question altogether. What the doctor will avoid telling you is that vaccines are unavoidably unsafe! This means that even if vaccines are handled and given properly, some children will die or will be hurt.

The reality—and the answer to the question—is this: You are responsible if your child is injured!

The National Child Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 protects the manufacturer from liability for unavoidable adverse side effects as long as the vaccine is properly prepared and accompanied by the proper directions and warnings. [14]

The Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) also protects your doctor from any liability if a vaccine injures your baby.

Conclusion:

If you decide to vaccinate your child, you do so at your own risk.

Your doctor can tell you vaccines are perfectly safe and your child will be “protected”, but the ones who are really “protected” are the doctors and the vaccine companies. What can you do? Take action right now.

Click on this link and download the vaccine ingredients. Then, look at the vaccine schedule and see what is going to be injected into your child.