Humans don't stand outside nature.

Is there a chimera, a hybrid or some other mixed human-animal genetic composite in our future? I certainly hope so. This may seem perverse: Even the most liberal theologians tend to shy away from advocating the production of half-person/half-animals. Why, then, am I rooting for them?

Because in these dark days of know-nothing anti-evolutionism (more than a bit of it sponsored by Seattle's own Discovery Institute) -- with religious fundamentalists occupying the White House, controlling much of Congress and even attempting to distort the teaching of science in the nation's schools -- a powerful dose of biological reality would be a very healthy event. After all, perhaps the most important take-home message from evolutionary science is the one that radical fundamentalists find most unacceptable: continuity. And this is precisely the message that chimeras, hybrids or mixed-species clones would drive home.

The latest tactic of creationists has been to couch their religious agenda in terms of "irreducible complexity" and "intelligent design," cloaking a refusal to acknowledge the natural, organic, material nature of Homo sapiens in a miasma of pseudo-science that (in most cases, at least) accepts "micro-evolutionary" events such as the emergence of drug-resistance in bacteria, but draws the line at the emergence of human beings from other "lower" life forms. It is a line that exists only in the minds of those who proclaim that the human species, unlike all others, possesses a spark of the divine and must have been specially created by god. It is a thin and, indeed, indefensible line, but one that generates a consequential conclusion: that we stand outside nature.

When -- and I mean when, not if -- geneticists and developmental biologists succeed in joining human and non-human animals in a viable organism, it will be difficult (perhaps impossible) for the special pleaders to maintain the fallacy that Homo sapiens is uniquely disconnected from the rest of life.

It is one thing to ignore the fact that human beings share roughly 99 percent of their genotype with chimpanzees; such ignore-ance will require even more intellectual sleight-of-hand when human and non-human cells literally are conjoined. Moreover, the benefits of such a physical demonstration of human/non-human non-separation will go beyond simply discomfiting the nay-sayers, and further than bolstering a "reality-based" as opposed to its bogus "faith-based" alternative. It will even exceed the inevitable -- and substantial -- medical advances that can be anticipated. I am thinking of the powerful payoff that will come from puncturing the most hurtful myth of all times, that of discontinuity between human beings and the rest of life.

Four decades ago, Lynn White wrote a now-classic article in the journal Science, "The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis," which forcefully made the point that much of the painful and destructive disconnect between human beings and their environment derives from the Judeo-Christian proclamation of radical discontinuity between people and the rest of "creation."

White argued that the Western world received its marching orders via a literal reading of Genesis: not only to go forth and multiply, but also to dominate and, whenever inclined, to destroy the animate world, which, forever estranged from our unique spiritual essence, existed only for human use and abuse. Whereas "we" are special, chips off the old supernatural block, "they" (all other life forms) are wholly different, made merely of matter. Hence, they don't really matter.

So let's hear it for our barrier-busting, hybridizing, chimera-creating future, anything that promises to wake up Homo sapiens to its glorious connection to the rest of life, whatever rubs our species-wide nose in the simple, yet sublime universal password proclaimed in Rudyard Kipling's "The Jungle Book": "We be of one blood, thee and I."

Or, better yet, let's leave the last words to that modern icon of organic wisdom, a kind of hybrid himself, SpongeBob SquarePants. SquarePants, a cheerful, talkative -- although admittedly, somewhat cartoonish -- fellow of the phylum Porifera, is only distantly related to anyone reading this column. But related he is. SquarePants "lives in a pineapple under the sea, Absorbent and yellow and porous is he." I don't know about the pineapple or the yellow, but ere long, even the most resistant anti-evolutionary "species-ists" will be forced to admit that absorbent and porous are we, too.