Vaccines kill as Many People as the Viruses Do!

It’s true. The actual H1N1 (swine flue – modified with bird flu) didn’t kill as many people as did the vaccine used. In fact, today the vaccines are much more dangerous than the diseases they supposedly prevent. These are facts supported by actual figures. What makes it even more horrible is that there is a simple, cheap, and more effective cure for viral diseases. BUT, it doesn’t make profit for Big Pharma, so it’s fought against using the FDA.

In addition to killing many people, vaccines are a major cause of ADD to autism, not to mention depression and other mental problems. Most contain mercury or aluminum as a preservative, and mercury, lead, aluminum and other toxic minerals kill or damage brain cells. Never let an infant get more than one vaccine at any time. If you can, prevent all vaccines from being given to your children.

If this is true, Why are we still using vaccines? Because Big Pharma makes huge amounts of money by scaring the public and the government about the HUGE dangers of any new virus – even one that was manufactured and let loose on purpose.

The Safe Cheap Alternate

Here’s a fact that most MD’s don’t even know. Vitamin C kills viruses – but only if taken in sufficient amounts!

OK, so what are “correct amounts? That depends on several factors:

How long the “infection” has been working in your body – Virus cells double every 20 minutes, so if you went to bed just sniffling – 8 hours later, the original amount of virus would be billions of times as strong, and you’d be feeling pretty lousy.
Individuality. What you inherited in infection fighting ability, and what your body has learned during your lifetime of fighting infections.
What type of Vitamin C you take. Some types seem to kill virus better than others.
Of these factors, by far the most important is the time involved. Doubling in strength every 20 minutes is very quick, and small amounts that kill less than half in an hour are virtually worthless. Big Pharma has used this to “scientifically prove” in several “peer reviewed” Medical Journal pieces that Vitamin C is not useful against virus (colds, flu’s, etc). If the real facts about vitamin C are known, then Big Pharma would lose billions in cold and flu drugs that are not as effective. Money talks – truth may not!

The other two factors, while not as important, do influence how much you need to start with, and how much you need to cut back to after you have had enough.

If you just start to feel sniffles or raspy throat, a good start would be 2-3 grams (2000-3000 mg) every 15 minutes until you just start diarrhea. (That’s called “Bowel Tolerance”, and it’s the only side effect of any consequence to taking Vitamin C – it’s useful as it tells when you’ve gotten too much). At that point, cut back to 2 every two hours, or just below the point of diarrhea for you. (Here’s where the individuality comes into the equation).

If no diarrhea within 4 hours, you’re probably not getting enough, so double your dose.

If you just woke up and you feel really bad, knowing you’ve got it (whatever is going around), you realize that you should have taken C last night, start with 4-6 grams every 15 minutes. At bowel tolerance cut back to 2-4 every hour, or less if diarrhea persists.