Preventable diseases must be stopped with vaccines: Opinion.

What is old is new again. And when it comes to public health, that is not a good thing.

In May, the New Jersey Department of Health issued a public health advisory after a measles outbreak was reported in Brooklyn among the Orthodox Jewish community. None of those with confirmed cases of measles was vaccinated against the disease.

In June, DOH identified a person confirmed as having measles who may have exposed others at BJ’s Wholesale Club in Watchung. Because measles is highly contagious and easily transmitted, anyone who was not vaccinated against measles and came into contact with the infected person was at risk.

These are just two local, high-profile incidents of a disturbing national trend: the resurgence of a multitude of vaccine-preventable diseases. Though these diseases have not been eradicated, they had been largely silent. Until recently.

When I was training as a pediatrician in the South Bronx in the mid-1970s, pertussis (commonly known as whooping cough) was essentially unheard of. The few cases I saw were enough, though, to instill great concern and fear in the doctors and nurses with whom I worked. Watching babies with pertussis choke and turn red and purple during a minute-long coughing spell, from which they may actually stop breathing, is frightening.

Before a vaccine was available, pertussis killed 5,000 to 10,000 people in the United States each year. Now, the pertussis vaccine has reduced the annual number of deaths to less than 30 cases, most of which are preventable by vaccination. Even the 30 deaths represent a significant increase over what had dwindled to near zero.

In 2012, there were 41,880 cases of pertussis reported nationally. Over the past three years, cases of pertussis have skyrocketed in New Jersey. In 2010, there were 10 confirmed cases. The following year, there were 29 confirmed cases. Last year, New Jersey confirmed an astonishing 238 cases of whooping cough, with another 175 probable cases.

Children who are exempt from vaccines put others at risk for these same deadly diseases.
So what happened between 1975, when I was a resident, and 2012?

The answer: people are not getting immunized. Fear is a primary culprit, and all of the fear is unfounded. In 1998, a British physician named Andrew Wakefield significantly altered the course of immunizations with the publication of a paper in which he linked the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine to autism in children. He was later discredited, and his medical license was revoked. But the fear he instilled lives on.

Although it is law in every state that children be properly immunized before attending school, exemptions are allowed for medical reasons as well as religious and personal beliefs.

New Jersey is one of 30 states (plus the District of Columbia) that allow medical and religious exemptions. According to the Journal of the American Medical Association, children exempt from vaccinations are more than 35 times more likely to contract measles and nearly six times more likely to contract pertussis, compared with vaccinated children.

What’s more, children who are exempt from vaccines put others at risk for these same deadly diseases. An increase or decrease in the number of exemptions affects the incidence of measles in nonexempt populations. Herd immunity is effective only if vaccination rates are at certain levels.

The reality today is that children are getting sick and dying from diseases many Americans thought were long gone. These diseases are preventable with proper vaccination.

August is immunization awareness month. Now more than ever, we need to send the message that vaccines are safe and save lives. And they are not just for children, either. Immunizations are needed throughout adult life, because immunity from childhood diseases may wear off over time.

Opponents of vaccinations link them to autism and other illnesses and perpetuate fears based on little to no scientific evidence. But the ramifications of not getting vaccinated are indisputable. Vaccines are safe and effective. Everyone should be vaccinated.