78 PERCENT INCREASE IN AUTISM RATES OVER PAST DECADE COINCIDES WITH NEW VACCINATION SCHEDULES.

The rate of autism among American children has nearly doubled over the past decade, according to a new report released by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), jumping from about one in 150 children back in 2000 to about one in 88 children in 2008, which is the last time official estimates were calculated. And interestingly, this steady rise in autism rates coincides directly with CDC-endorsed vaccination schedules that have also risen sharply since the 1980s.

Back in 1983, for example, the CDC recommended only ten vaccines for children from birth through six years old (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/images/schedule1983s.jpg). Today, that number has risen significantly to 29 vaccines and counting, many of which are now administered all at one time or in combinations like the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine.

And yet the mainstream medical system and its allies in the government and media are willfully ignoring this glaring fact, blaming “unknown” causes and “genetics” for causing autism, which are the two most common catch-all scapegoats. And in explaining the drastic rise in autism rates over the years, the talking heads actually claim that there is no rise — the seemingly elevated autism rates are merely the result of improved autism screening methods that are now identifying more cases.

Vaccines, fluoride, MSG, GMOs, toxic chemicals, processed foods – the real causes of autism.

Sadly, these laughably unscientific excuses for this epidemic condition are actually being taken seriously by many people, while the true causes of autism — vaccines, fluoridated water, monosodium glutamate (MSG), genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), toxic chemicals, and processed foods — continue to remain taboo subjects when talking about autism.

But any rational human being that takes the time to objectively investigate the science behind how autism spectrum disorders are, at the very least, spurred on by these and other toxins, will quickly realize that the ugly truth about autism is being concealed from the public. And while these factors may not cause autism symptoms in every single person that is exposed to them, they surely trigger it in many, especially when exposures are combined and persistent.

Vaccines, for instance, which the medical establishment have presumptuously declared to play absolutely no role in autism, continue to show up in independent, non-pharma-sponsored research as a cause of autism. Whether they contain thimerosal (mercury) or not, vaccines are definitively linked to neurological disorders that were largely non-existent prior to mass-vaccination campaigns.

Even the kangaroo “vaccine court” has quietly admitted this, having settled with several families whose children were injured by vaccines. Back in 2009, for instance, a vaccine court ruled that Bailey Banks, a young boy who suffered acute brain damage after getting the MMR vaccine, had indeed been injured by the vaccine. Special Master Richard Abell wrote at the time that “the MMR vaccine at issue actually caused the conditions from which Bailey suffered and continues to suffer”.

The case was one of several that has received little or no media attention, and yet it speaks volumes about the dangers associated with vaccines. It also exposes the lies of the deniers who have declared that vaccines are in no way related to autism — case closed.

And besides vaccines, fluoridated water, MSG, GMOs, toxic chemicals both in the environment and in the food supply, and processed foods in general have all been linked to autism spectrum disorders as well.

