Bring science into 21st century.

The start of school is just around the corner, so high school biology students across New Jersey can look forward to an annual rite of fall - learning all about evolution. 
Either bored or attentive, those young scholars will copy into their notebooks all the well-worn points, from natural selection to survival of the fittest. 

The hero of the story, and his romantic voyage to faraway islands inhabited by exotic creatures, will stir their hearts. 

And those students will come away from those classes with the satisfied feeling that they have encountered, in a small measure, the wonders of modern science. 
It's a great rite of passage. 

It's also sheer nonsense. 

As an explanation of how the vast variety of life came about, from plankton to people, 
evolution is simply neither factual nor scientific. 

Evolution is a fairy tale, a mythology, a religion if you will, gussied up in pseudo scientific language to take in the gullible. 

Like your children. 

Evolution posits, for example, that the design we intuitively see in nature is simply an illusion. An eye that seems to be well-designed to read books up close and see mountains far away - not really designed. The ten fingers, an awesome set of equipment - well, all chance, just happened. 

In the next weeks and months, we will take a look together at the gaping lack of authentic scientific evidence for evolution. (This site will also cover lots of other, unrelated, topics.) And how much of what is spoon-fed to your children as evolution "science" isn't really science at all. 

We'll also consider how intelligent design is a much more rational - and scientific - explanation of human origins. 

Whoa! Intelligent design, as everybody says, is cousin to special creationism, religion in a trench coat, masquerading as science. Can't have that in the classroom! 

You're right, after a fashion. Special creation, i.e. the Genesis account, is a religious belief, and should not be taught (as science) in a secular classroom. 

But intelligent design is a different animal. It is based on scientific evidence alone, and not on the Biblical account. If nature exhibits evidence of design, evidence so strong that life cannot be accounted for by the random mechanism posited by Darwinism, then ... 
Then scientists who are willing to go where the evidence leads should be willing to consider the evidence for intelligent design as a scientific explanation of the origin and diversity of life. 

We should also have enough respect for students to let them weigh the scientific evidence for intelligent design. 

Just spoon feeding them one side, a worn-out 19th century mythology, just makes for a boring biology class. 

Teach the controversy. Watch biology class come alive. 
