Expanding nuclear power will benefit U.S.: Front Burner.

I believe nuclear energy has a significant role to play in meeting the energy demands of the 21st century.

This is perhaps not surprising, as I work at Argonne National Laboratory, where researchers were the first to harness nuclear power to produce safe, clean electricity back in 1951.

But today at Argonne, we do research on almost every kind of energy technology, as well as analyzing energy use and markets. Based on this knowledge, we believe that America needs a variety of energy sources to remain economically strong. Nuclear energy has a specific role to play; it is the cleanest, safest way to generate large amounts of electricity on demand.

Nuclear plants have been providing low-cost electricity to Florida and many other states for decades, accounting for about 20 percent of America's electricity. Each nuclear plant creates up to 700 permanent, well-paid jobs. Construction of each plant involves up to 3,500 jobs. Once the plant is completed, it provides constant, affordable, round-the-clock energy to the community. It also benefits local businesses because the price of nuclear-generated electricity has historically been more stable than other power sources.

Environmentally speaking, nuclear energy makes sense. It doesn't emit carbon or noxious pollutants into the air as coal plants do. Unlike other sustainable technologies, such as wind and solar, it can provide large amounts of electricity on demand. Utilities have to generate power when we consumers require it. Nuclear and fossil plants run on demand over 90 percent of the time. But each wind and solar installation needs a companion power plant of the same capacity, usually burning natural gas, to fill in the 80 percent of the time when wind or sunlight are diminished or "off."

And with land at an increasing premium in Florida and many other areas of the country, nuclear power produces a lot of energy on a small amount of land. Solar power requires about 58 times as much land as does a nuclear plant with the same energy production. For wind turbines, it's 533 times as much.

The most common worry about nuclear energy is safety. However, the nuclear industry in the United States has an excellent safety track record over the more than 40 years that it has operated 100-odd plants. At the national labs, we've developed the foundations for new generations of nuclear energy plants that are even safer. One of their strengths comes from safety designs that rely on the very laws of physics themselves to keep the reactor cool even if the plant loses power, which is what happened at Fukushima. There are 72 reactors under construction around the world today; increasing numbers of them use these and other types of advanced designs to make the plants safer and more efficient.

The most striking display of nuclear "greenness" is the nuclear-powered submarine. The nuclear steam plant propels the ship and generates electricity for lighting and air conditioning, for making fresh water and oxygen and for removing carbon dioxide exhaled by the crew's breathing. Despite the ship's sealed environment, there is no radioactive contamination. When I served on a submarine, my bunk was about 35 feet from the reactor.

What about nuclear waste? Many people don't know this, but you can recycle nuclear fuel. Recycling in advanced reactors is the best way to dispose of used fuel because it would drastically reduce the amount of waste as well as the time it must be isolated.