How Changing My Son's Diet Improved His Autism Symptoms.

Natural foods, free of chemicals, gluten, dyes and other unpronounceable products, work best for my son. Perhaps switching up diet can help your child too. 

I know that when I have a simple headache or stomachache, the last thing I want to do is read, write or even talk with people. This is something, yet again, our youngest child Jonathan has taught me. When he isn’t feeling good, he will not comply, communicate or even engage in his favorite games.

So what does feeling bad have to do with food? That is what I wanted to know because I was hearing so much about “autism diets.”

Our journey started early when Jonathan stopped breastfeeding at three months old and our pediatrician suggested to feed him soy formula. At 18 months old, after we did an allergy test, I found out Jonathan was allergic to his soy baby formula and milk. All those months of neurodevelopment and he was allergic to his main nutritional supplement. Chalk that one up to the awakening of diet changes.

Jonathan had a compromised immune system at the age of 18 months, so I took him off soy formula and soy milk and I got eye contact. Not very long time frames, but long enough to see those beautiful blue-green eyes connect to mine for a few seconds. I was really shocked. I mean, could diet really bring eye contact and responsiveness from our son?

The answer was yes. That was when I delved into the diet changes which yielded better digestion, behavior, attention span, eye contact and more. Sounds like autism symptoms right?

Fast forward to 2012, when I watched a documentary on GMO (genetically modified organisms) foods called Genetic Roulette. The documentary revealed that the soy baby formula I had given to Jonathan from three to 18 months (crucial brain developmental stages), was made with 86 percent GMO neurotoxin-chemical soy infused with glyphosate. Translation: Jonathan was getting 86 percent soy made with the same chemicals found in Round Up weed killer. And I never saw that on the label of the container.

Between vaccines, soy baby formula, allergies and environmental toxins, our little guy didn’t have a chance for a normal developmental and detoxification bio-system (major hindsight here, so learn from our journey).

Changing Jonathan’s diet through the years has been instrumental in his physical and cognitive growth. We found out certain foods did effect him certain ways — corn would make him angry and turn his ear tips bright red; soy would make him “foggy” and unresponsive; wheat or gluten would cause irritable bowel syndrome (IBS); and dairy would cause all of these mentioned issues plus give him horrible rashes and eczema.

So I have a question for you: Why not remove some certain foods from your child’s diet to see if they will feel better, give you more eye contact, have better bowel movements or become less hyper? It is free, safe and you will have answers within a week’s time.

Remember I am not a nutritionist or physician, but a mom who has figured a few things out these past years to help our children live healthier and better lives. Here are a few tips based on what my family tried:

1. According to Jonathan’s allergy tests, he was allergic to basically everything, so I made a list of everything he is allergic to and started looking for foods to feed him. Do not do this. Instead, look at the foods your child is not allergic to and make a list of five to 10 items he/she can eat. This is so much easier and less over whelming.

2. Even though you have 20/20 vision, buy a magnifying glass you can carry in your purse or bag to be able to read the ingredients on the labels. The type face can get tiny and you will read words identifying chemicals with five or more syllables you can’t pronounce. If your package product has more than five ingredients on the label, put it back on the shelf and look for something GMO-free or organic.

3. The first time you go into a store after deciding to redo your child’s diet, give yourself a two-hour window and go by yourself. Take a smart phone to take pictures of items and make a visual grocery list.

4. Many mainstream grocery stores carry gluten-free packaged products now, which can be helpful. I personally don’t buy many packaged goods at all. The preservatives are so bad for Jonathan that I found it much easier to stick to organic fresh foods, fruits, and vegetables.

5. You want to cycle the foods he/she can have. Try not to make every meal chicken or whatever protein they can eat. If you are not careful, your child can create an allergy to a food if they are saturated with.

6. Take out any foods that have these items in the label because they are used as chemical preservatives:

– High fructose corn syrup

– Any foods containing corn or soy as it has a 90 percent chance of being a GMO and full of chemical toxins. Also a great resource about GMO foods is the Non GMO Project.

– Soy lecithin

– Sugar-free products are very deceptive because most are made with sugar alcohol (made from corn). You have a better chance going with a food made from organic cane sugar, agave nectar or organic honey for your child to process in their digestive system.

Through the 13-plus years we have had to itemize Jonathan’s diet, we have tried the gluten/casein-free diet, SCD diet, low oxalate diet, GMO-free, sugar-free diet, yeast-free diet, soy-free, the “pull my hair out because I’m going crazy” diet. The most important things I concluded from all these diets are:

– Stick with fresh, organic, non-GMO foods: fruits, veggies, chicken, turkey, untainted fresh fish (yes fish, but not tuna);

– Try not to feed your child packaged goods loaded with food dyes. There are so many chemicals listed in the ingredients that your child might be sensitive too, just pass on it until you can boost your child’s digestive system to breakdown the allergen foods;

– At restaurants, order meat, veggies or fruit — plain. If you go for chicken nuggets, ask if the flour is gluten-free and you don’t want anything fried in vegetable oil or soy oil (grape-seed, olive, and coconut oil fats are easier for little tummies to breakdown);

– Always carry a digestive enzyme to give your child at mealtime or between meals to help their bodies breakdown the proteins and fats in foods. Jonathan gets a peppermint and fennel Young Living Essential Oil capsule for his meals or detoxzyme and it helps his digestive system.

If your child is hyper, has ADHD, OCD, ODD, autism, leaky gut syndrome, hives, allergies, or rage behaviors, please consider doing something very simple and change their diet. Their noncompliance and engine in “overdrive” could be changed with natural food choices that can make your child’s world open up.
