Safety, security are top priorities of Palo Verde nuclear plant.

One year ago, a massive earthquake and tsunami struck Japan, causing widespread devastation to the northeastern region of the island nation. The tsunami severely damaged Japan's Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear-power plant, compromising the safety of the plant, necessitating the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of residents and causing concern around the world.

The incident at Fukushima understandably led to many questions regarding the safety of all nuclear-power plants, including Arizona's Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station. Then and now, it is important to know, there are significant differences between the Fukushima Dai-ichi plant and Palo Verde.

For instance, Palo Verde was deliberately constructed in a low seismic area, and because of its desert location, is not susceptible to tsunamis. If Arizona were to experience a large earthquake, Palo Verde's robust construction would make it one of the safest places in the state.

The tsunami that shut down Fukushima's reactors also rapidly flooded the plant's back-up power systems. Without working back-up generators, the pumps designed to circulate coolant water at the plant ceased to work. This eventually caused Fukushima's reactors to overheat.

Palo Verde is of a fundamentally different design than Fukushima, with containment buildings that are larger and far stronger. Palo Verde also has multiple levels of safety systems -- including redundant sources of back-up power -- that are physically separated at the plant to ensure that essential equipment can continue to operate. Finally, if needed, Palo Verde has sufficient water on site to cool the plant for more than a year.

The United States nuclear energy industry is subject to strict regulation and operating standards. In addition, Palo Verde is one of our nation's most modern nuclear-power facilities. As operators of the plant, we will always seek ways to improve the safety and security of this vital energy resource.

Within hours of the tsunami hitting the Fukushima plant last year, we assembled a team of our most experienced engineers to monitor the situation in Japan and analyze potential lessons. After thoroughly evaluating all aspects of the tragic event, we identified ways to make Palo Verde even safer and took swift action to put these changes in place.

The improvements have included: acquiring five additional on-site fire trucks capable of delivering emergency cooling water if all other power sources fail; completing a thorough evaluation of Palo Verde's on-site water resources; purchasing additional back-up equipment such as portable generators and pumps; and working closely with other U.S. nuclear operators to ensure accident management techniques and guidelines are clear and consistent.

Palo Verde remains an Arizona success story. For more than two decades, the plant's dependable supply of safe, emission-free power has enabled us to meet our state's rapidly growing electricity needs.

In April 2011, the importance and quality of the plant was further confirmed when the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission renewed the licenses for Palo Verde's three units for an additional 20 years.

Our prayers go out to the people of Japan as they continue to recover and rebuild from this tragedy. Here in Arizona, the safety and security of the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station has always been -- and will always be -- a top priority.