Have an honest debate on global warming.

I cringe every time I hear someone invoke "settled science." And when a scientist does it, I smell a rat.

Gravity is settled science. But how gravity works is not. Not much of science is all that settled. Especially assertions that global warming is man-made. Claims of settled science have such a tattered history of being wrong, you'd think global warming partisans would be afraid to trot out that old canard.

Yet, they do. We got another dose of settled-science baloney a couple of weeks ago when the National Research Council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said the science underlying the assertions of man-made global warming is "sound," despite "Climategate" discoveries that called into question global warming's basic conclusions. Even worse, the council's panel went well beyond the reach of cautious science by stepping into the political arena and calling for a carbon tax or cap-and-trade legislation.

The panel reeks with politics. Global warming activists from the World Wildlife Fund, the John Heinz III Center, Carnegie Institution and Susanne Moser Research and Consulting form the core of the panel, said James M. Taylor, senior fellow at the Chicago-based Heartland Institute.

Well, you'll say, "Isn't the conservative Heartland Institute just as bad, doing exactly what it accuses global warming activists of doing: politicizing what should be a purely technical and scientific issue?"

Well, I'd respond, if you had attended the institute's fourth International Conference on Climate Change two weeks ago in Chicago, you would have heard climate scientists describe in detail the unraveling of the case for man-made global warming. In addition to the science discussed there, Joseph Bast, Heartland president, described other developments that have been eating away at the settled science:

In February, Phil Jones, director of the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia in England, admitted to the absence of evidence of statistically significant global warming since 1995. He said the "vast majority of climate scientists" don't agree that the issue is settled. His climate unit was the source of the Climategate e-mails last year that disclosed serious data manipulation. And, in January, the torchbearer of global warming — the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change — acknowledged major errors of fact and forecasts.

You can argue that this doesn't disprove the existence of global warming. And you'd be right. But it certainly puts the lie to claims that the issue is settled science. Eigil Friis-Christensen, a member of the Royal Swedish Academy and fellow of the American Geophysical Union, wondered aloud at the conference if the scientific method can survive the politically motivated attacks. "The debate is over, it is said again and again," he said. But he reminded his audience that the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Al Gore and the IPCC for their global warming campaign is not a science prize. Yet the media irresponsibly took it as an endorsement of global warming, he said. (Irresponsibly, the media gave wide coverage to the National Research Council's news release, but were almost completely absent from the conference.)

Many global warming activists would rather personalize the argument by the branding of those who call for a dispassionate debate as "skeptics" or "members of the flat earth society."

But Richard Lindzen, a professor of atmospheric sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, warned of accepting "something that explains everything," especially something as complicated as climate. He and other scientists at the Heartland conference repeatedly pointed out that true science is based on observation and verification; computer climate models, considered the touchstone of global warming proof, are not scientific evidence.

For years now, global warming partisans have tried to discredit their scientific challengers by alluding to the persecution of Galileo, the 17th century physicist, mathematician and astronomer, because his science did not conform to church teachings. If you argue that the global warming science is unsettled, you likewise are portrayed as anti-science.

I would remind global warming partisans and the National Research Council that Galileo's persecutors argued from authority, instead of addressing the science itself. That's exactly what the partisans are doing by asserting we have to accept their theories because they have a "scientific consensus." In that, they are arguing, as did the church, from authority.

But that's what I would expect from folks whose religion is a dogmatic ideology.