Stop the polarization of climate change.

Was it global warming that last week threatened to freeze-dry America?

While most Americans were struggling just to stay warm, the political atmosphere turned superheated about whether human activity caused the global warming that caused the polar vortex that caused last week's bitter, record cold.

The assertion that warmth causes cold struck many Americans as a bit ironic, if not amusing. Frigid fingers filled the social mediaether with the seemingly reasonable question: "What happened to global warming?"

Global warming theorists quickly responded, proposing a scenario that the frigid winds rushing around the North Pole — the polar vortex — were forced to dip farther south than usual by the changing climate conditions caused by the loss of arctic ice, which, according to the hypothesis, is the result of global warming.

But what came next was the kind of politically inspired hysteria from both sides that demeans and damages science and its methods.

Conservative radio talker Rush Limbaugh went off the rails, explicating that the polar vortex talk is a "hoax" and "lie," abetted by the alarmists' domination of the media. On the other side, at least one editorial cartoonist went to work portraying people who question global warming as nitwits.

Global warming champions responded derisively to those who reasonably questioned the polar vortex scenario, noting that one extreme weather event (i.e., the cold snap) does not disprove that global warming exists. True. But, in this, they have created a straw man. Serious scientists and others who challenge global warming conclusions don't claim that one extreme weather event, including last week's, disproves climate change. Only dullards from both sides do.

Everyone. Take a deep breath. Get a glass of water. Sit.

First, the polar vortex theory is just that — a theory. Not yet proven. Evidence, as it is painstakingly gathered over the years, might or might not support it. Scientific consensus and political opinion are not scientific evidence.

It is advisable in this respect to listen to James Overland, Arctic researcher at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Are, he wondered, extreme events, such as the displacement of the polar vortex, just the way the climate normally behaves or are they the result of changes in the climate.

"We really can't prove which one it really is, and that's where the public is probably fairly confused," he wisely said. He noted that one set of scientists who adhere very strongly to the scientific method demand years and years of data, while another set of scientists, equally serious, will say that we can't wait for 10 years of data until we have all the scientific proof we need before acting. In this, the interpretation of such extreme events is more of a philosophical than a scientific question, he suggested.

It's important to know where Overland made these observations: at an Obama White House "We the Geeks" podcast Friday with "meteorologists, climate scientists and weather experts about why temperatures dipped to such frigid lows ... and what we know about extreme weather events in the context of a changing climate."

I gather that Overland isn't one of "those" climate change "deniers." Perhaps the White House figured that it would get more support from Overland and others to back the idea that, in the words of the president's science adviser John Holdren, "odds are" that extreme weather events, such as the polar vortex, will increase because of global warming. "Odds are" is another way of saying, "It's a guess."

Another panelist, J. Marshall Shepherd, president of the American Meteorological Society, struck the right note when he observed during the discussion the large amount of "negative energy in the Twitterworld" about climate change. He suggested a pause in the hostilities, noting that "scientists debate" — it's what they do.

I guess he's suggesting that there's still plenty of room for discourse and dialogue about climate change. If we're to have it, America needs to renew its respect for the scientific method and its practitioners.

Obama doesn't contribute much to that understanding when he puts down "denier" arguments, saying in a speech last June that "We don't have time for a meeting of the Flat Earth Society."

Whether it comes out of the mouth of Obama or Limbaugh, such trashing of the scientific method when it comes to climate change should stop.