Carroll: Time to embrace GMO labeling.

On Election Day, Colorado demonstrated the futility of throwing big money behind a ballot measure that rubbed voters the wrong way. But let's not get carried away in discounting money's relevance.

In Washington state on the same day, big money was torpedoing a measure of national significance that originally enjoyed huge public support in polls.

Initiative 522, which required labels on food products containing genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, was battered by millions of dollars of advertising financed mainly by the Grocery Manufacturers Association, Monsanto, and other agribusiness interests.

The same dynamic occurred the previous year in California, where another labeling measure went down to narrow defeat after a blizzard of ads.

For those who profess to respect science, these ballot outcomes on GMOs should be welcome, yet also troubling.

On the one hand, virtually every important expert group — such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Medical Association's Council on Science and Public Health — has pronounced on GMO safety. The scientific consensus is so broad that when a team of Italian scholars examined 1,783 research papers and reports on GMOs over the past 10 years, they concluded, in a paper published this fall, that "the scientific research conducted so far has not detected any significant hazards directly connected with the use of [genetically engineered] crops."

So there is no scientific reason to label foods that contain genetically modified crops.

On the other hand, the victories for science in Washington and California may amount to a temporary reprieve. Even with their enviable war chests, opponents of labeling are unlikely to prevail every time. The anti-GMO fearmongers are driven by powerful ideology and will not relent. Sooner or later, they'll break through.

Indeed, Maine and Connecticut have already passed labeling laws, contingent upon other states following. It's difficult to argue against transparency and the consumer right to know, even if the labeling movement's motive is to wreck what Scientific American, in a September editorial, described as "an immensely beneficial technology."

As the environmentalist and former anti-GMO activist Mark Lynas recently argued at a conference in Chicago, it's time for the food industry to shift tactics. It should "stop opposing labeling" and embrace a national labeling scheme that presents the facts in non-judgmental language.

And then trust the maturity of the average consumer.

After all, as NPR reporter Martin Kaste has pointed out, "Americans have been eating GMO foods since 1996, without strange side effects." Matter-of-fact labels might actually demystify some of the concern over GMOs, Kaste suggests.

Let's hope so.

"We need crops that are resistant to new diseases, that can cope with a changing climate and that enable us to feed an increasing human population while minimising the environmental impact of agriculture," Lynas explains.

Four months ago, The New York Times published a fascinating account of the quest "to save the orange" from a scourge known as "citrus greening," for which citrus crops have no immunity. The only apparent hope: genetic engineering.

We are told by anti-GMO activists, egged on by the organics industry and the likes of Dr. Bronner's Magic Soaps, that such use of science is dangerous and impermissible. In the long run, however, it's hard to believe most of humanity will agree.