The Message of Evolution.

Is there life after death? One way to answer this question is to examine whether nature reveals some kind of a plan for life. We're seeking not just any plan, but one that shows a progression from perishable things to imperishable things. Yes, a plan that develops from something like inert matter to something like consciousness or the mind would do very nicely. That's because consciousness and the mind have qualities very different from those of material bodies, and it's possible that they can survive even after bodies perish.

Most biologists emphatically deny that there is a plan. Evolution, they say, is based on chance and random accident.

Several years ago, biologist Stephen Jay Gould famously argued that if we could re-run the tape of evolution from an identical starting point, there wouldn't be humans but rather radically different creatures populating the planet. Insisting that we are material products of a random process, science historian William B. Provine concludes that "when we die, we die, and that is the end of us."

Not so fast. The conclusions of Gould and Provine reflect the conventional wisdom in biology, but some leading biologists are challenging it. Two of them are Christian de Duve, who won the 1974 Nobel Prize for his study of cells, and Simon Conway Morris, who is a leading expert on the fossils of the Burgess Shale.

De Duve and Morris insist that evolution is not purely random but rather follows predictable pathways. Eyes, for example, have evolved on separate evolutionary lines on multiple occasions. Placental and marsupial mammals are not closely related, and yet they have developed with similar structures and forms.

De Duve and Morris contend that evolution routinely produces "convergent" solutions, and the clear implication is that if we could re-run the tape of evolution, we'd find a similar pattern emerging all over again.

In "Vital Dust," de Duve reveals evolution's obvious plan and direction: For all the disruptions and cataclysms, there is a clear progression from simple creatures to complicated ones. De Duve's "The Tree of Life" has eubacteria and archaebacteria at the root, then simple eukaryotes, then more complex multicellular organisms, then fungi and plants, then fishes, then reptiles, then mammals, and finally humans.

Strikingly, de Duve speaks of an "arrow of evolution" that moves biological history through successive stages, from the "age of chemistry" to the "age of information" to the "age of the single cell" to the "age of multicellular organisms" and finally to the "age of the mind."

The age of the mind: an arresting concept. It reveals that evolution has gone beyond increasing complexity; it has provided the catalyst for a new order of being in the world - a being that can discover evolution. Through the human mind, nature has unfolded a plan for nature itself to become known. This undeniable evolutionary trajectory from matter to mind opens up a tantalizing possibility.

Material things like bodies are perishable but immaterial things like ideas aren't. So we, like nature, might have a built-in progression from perishable matter to imperishable mind. The time will come when our bodies will irretrievably break down, but it is possible, indeed suggested within the script of nature, that a part of us might outlast these mortal coils.