Pace of global warming adds to urgency to change.

President Obama made another modest attempt to do something about climate change last week by ordering federal agencies to more than double their use of renewable energy by 2020.

The operative word is modest. There is no hope of doing something truly transformational to meet the No. 1 challenge of our times in a Republican-controlled House of Representatives, where deference to consumer fear, dubious science and the clout of Big Oil continues to rule the day.

The contrast between Washington's foot dragging and California's leadership on reduction of greenhouse gas emissions was cast in high relief during a Tuesday panel discussion on "Climate Change and California's Future" put together by the Public Policy Institute of California.

Participants included Steven Chu, former energy secretary; Mary Nichols, chairwoman of the state Air Resources Board; and George Shultz, whose deep resume of top-level jobs includes a stint as secretary of state under President Ronald Reagan.

They came to debunk the pessimism and denial that has prevented meaningful action in Washington. Where skeptics see action as a millstone on the economy (higher fuel prices, lifestyle sacrifices, shaky dependence on renewables), the panelists saw promise and opportunity.

Chu particularly wanted to challenge the misconception that renewable technologies are too expensive and overly reliant on government subsidies. He predicted they would be cheaper than fossil fuels "within a decade - or two at the most." Storage remains a challenge for wind and solar power, he acknowledged, but the advancements in technology are rapidly making such energy sources more effective and affordable.

All three panelists reminded the audience that California's leadership on air quality has not only paid off in fuel economy and health benefits, it has forced the federal government to respond. Nichols traced the state's commitment to the late 1960s and early 1970s, when it went after smog reduction, or as she called it, "the precursors to global warming." She emphasized that California was acting not just to be independent but to solve "a problem we couldn't get the federal government to act on."

Californians clearly don't regret such efforts. PPIC research associate Sonja Petek said a "recurring theme" of opinion surveys is that Californians expect more action on climate.

So how do we get there against the resistance at the national level?

The seasoned and savvy Shultz had an interesting answer. He compared the doubters of climate change - a stance that is "harder and harder to defend," he said - to industries and politicians who balked at efforts to curb the production and use of chemicals that were depleting the ozone layer.

Shultz said those who question the science on whether human activity is a major source of global warming would at least have to admit that "it's a big problem" if it does happen.

"So let's take out an insurance policy," he said, echoing the reasoning that secured passage of federal legislation signed by President George H. W. Bush that has helped cut sulfur-dioxide emissions by half. That bill instituted a cap-and-trade program - similar to California's approach to climate change - that provided financial incentives for companies that exceeded emission goals and penalties for those that did not.

It was impossible not to come away from that session without a sense that the nation eventually can and must share California's commitment to addressing climate change. But time is not on our side. Every year of inaction - or modest action - raises the threshold for what must be done.

As laudatory as it may be for California to lower its greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020, Chu suggested that the nation will need to lower its emissions to one-fifth of 1990 levels by 2050.

He said he would be "very worried" if "we don't do something on that scale." One critical next step, all panelists agreed, would be a carbon tax that fully reflects the price of greenhouse emissions on the planet's climate, and thus allows renewable technologies to compete on a level playing field.

Californians should be justly proud of what this state has done to date. But we also should be worried - and resolved to do more.

Where California led the way
In the absence of strong action from the nation's capital, this state has been at the forefront of the American response to the challenge facing our planet. Among the areas confronted by the state:

Gas-guzzling automobiles
-- AB1493 (2002)

Goal: To limit the amount of greenhouse gases emitted by new passenger vehicles.

Method: The law went through a tortuous legal and bureaucratic process with the feds - with automakers resisting every step of the way - but finally took effect in 2009 and was emulated by more than a dozen states. It was a driving force behind the Obama administration's success in elevating national fuel standards last year.

Land use and planning
-- SB375 (2008)

Goal: To force governments at all levels to consider the carbon footprint when making transportation and land-use decisions.

Method: Because transportation accounts for about 40 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions - and most of those are from cars and trucks - the idea was to get each region to come up with targets for reduction, and to ensure that transportation and land-use decisions advance that goal.

Renewable resources
-- SB1078 (2002)

Goal: To ensure an increasing use of solar, wind and other renewable resources.

Method: The original measure and its successors (it was accelerated in 2006 under SB107 and further expanded in 2011 under SB2) require investor-owned utilities, electric service providers, and community choice aggregators to increase their portfolio of renewable energy resources to 33 percent by 2020.

The big commitment
-- AB32 (2006)

Goal: To lower greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 (a 17 percent reduction).

Method: California became the first state to require that a range of businesses reduce greenhouse gas pollution. The strategies included a cap-and-trade system (taking effect in 2012), in which polluting companies would be required to get cleaner or buy credits from greener enterprises.