Our children's burden.

On a personal level, most of us would go to extraordinary lengths to steer our children and grandchildren away from physical or economic peril. Yet look at the mess we're leaving them with public policies that can only be described as selfish and shortsighted: Global warming will accelerate to a catastrophic degree, scientists agree, unless we break our reliance on fossil fuels. The national deficit now exceeds $15 trillion, or more than $50,000 for every man, woman and child in the United States.

And, still, Washington has yet to get serious about addressing either issue.

Here's a way to attack those two long-term problems at once: Level a tax on carbon - to push the transition to cleaner energy - and apply every penny of the revenue to reduction of the federal debt. Call it the "Future for Our Grandchildren Act of 2013."

I realize that this Congress is more likely to pass a resolution praising Kim Jong Un or condemning motherhood than to adopt a straight-up plan to address climate change and the national debt, undiluted with pet projects, tax breaks for favored interests or other political softeners.

The special interests that would benefit most from this plan - future generations - would not be there to compete with the clamor of the lobbyists who would either object to the new tax ... or want a piece of it.

Still, it would be interesting to see someone on Capitol Hill introduce such a bill and challenge lawmakers to make arguments against a relatively modest sacrifice - in higher fuel costs and spending restraint - to relieve the burdens created by our excessive consumption of environmental and fiscal resources.

The argument for a carbon tax is solid: It forces fossil fuel prices to reflect the environmental costs they create, and it gives developers of green technologies a greater assurance of future demand for alternative energies - especially if the tax is structured to rise over time.

The closest thing to my plan was a recently introduced bill by Sen. Bernie Sanders, a Vermont independent, and Sen. Barbara Boxer, a California Democrat, to levy a $20-a-ton tax on carbon or methane equivalents. Predictably, the bill has generated no Republican support of any consequence.

Just as predictably, the Sanders-Boxer bill would spend about 75 percent of the $1.2 trillion it would raise over its first decade. It would set aside just $300 billion for deficit reduction - a tiny dent in the $15 trillion debt. It would fund everything from home weatherization to a tripling of the federal budget for energy research and development.

The biggest chunk of new spending (60 percent) would be redistributed to American families. Each U.S. resident would receive a monthly payment as a share of the carbon-tax revenue.

Imagine the sweet double dip to Alaskans who now receive a cut of the state's oil royalties.

The Sanders-Boxer bill has received an endorsement - and a prod to go further - from the Coronado grassroots group Citizens Climate Lobby. A contingent of informed and earnest representatives of the local chapter (economists, attorneys, scientists) visited with our editorial board last week. They like the Sanders-Boxer bill, though they want the carbon tax to be pushed higher - and all of the revenue distributed to U.S. residents.

But the notion of a tax-redistribution program - while perhaps good politics - works at cross purposes with a purported national commitment to wean ourselves from fossil fuels. It has no correlation between energy consumption and rebate. The notion that the effects of the tax on 300 million Americans will be buffered by a monthly check undercuts the grim reality of what it will take to slow the warming of the planet: short-term sacrifice and a long-term changing of our ways.

Besides, are our children really better off with a few extra dollars to spend every month or a serious effort to reduce the national debt? Interest payments on that debt now exceed $220 billion a year - almost double what the federal government spends on food stamps - and are expected to reach $1 trillion by 2020.

Let's put those numbers in context: The sequestration, which has caused so much caterwauling in Washington, will reduce just $85 billion from this year's deficit. And the sequestration cuts reduce the annual deficit, not our accumulated debt. Even with these cuts, the federal government is spending more than it receives.

It's hard to reconcile the concern we express for our heirs - a truly bipartisan and unquestionably heartfelt sentiment - with our unwillingness to confront the burdens we will be leaving them with climate change and national debt.

Let's attack both, at once and with one bill: the Future for our Grandchildren Act of 2013.

A partial solution to two great challenges. 

Sen. Bernie Sanders, a Vermont Independent, and Sen. Barbara Boxer, a California Democrat, recently proposed legislation to combat climate change by imposing a carbon tax.

What it does: The tax on carbon or methane equivalent would start at $20 a ton, and rise 5.6 percent annually over 10 years. It would be applied to all imported fuels and domestic fossil fuels at the point of origin: for example, coal mines, oil refineries and natural gas processing plants.

How much would it raise: An estimated $1.2 trillion over 10 years.

Where the money goes: Sixty percent of the revenue would be returned directly to American citizens each month under a proposed Family Clean Energy Rebate Program. It also would fund programs to weatherize 1 million homes a year, help finance renewable energy programs and invest in worker training. About $300 million would be used to help pay down the federal debt of more than $15 trillion.

What else it does: Allows the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate fracking under the Safe Drinking Water Act. A companion bill by Sanders would end tax breaks for fossil fuel companies.