Vaccines And Autism: The Secret That You Are Not Supposed To Know.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the number of children in the United States with autism has risen by 78 percent over the past decade.  It is now estimated that 1 out of every 88 children in the United States has some form of autism disorder.  Our schools are absolutely packed with “special needs” children and millions of parents are desperately trying to figure out why so many kids are having such severe developmental problems.  Strangely, most autistic children start out perfectly normal.  Most of them develop just fine for the first year or two and then something dramatic happens.  So what could that possibly be?  Well, there is a secret that you are not supposed to know.  That secret is that vaccines are one of the primary causes of autism.  As the number of vaccines being administered to our children has risen, so has the percentage of our children with autism.  Today, in some areas of the United States more than 30 vaccines are being given to young children before the age of 3.  When you inject so much mercury and so much other toxic material directly into the bloodstreams of vulnerable young children, bad stuff is bound to happen.  The evidence linking vaccines and autism continues to mount, and yet the pharmaceutical establishment continues to vigorously deny that there could possibly be any link between the two.

Each year, there are thousands upon thousands of parents that take their perfectly healthy toddlers into the doctor to get a vaccine and later end up deeply regretting it.  Shortly after taking one too many vaccines, many children get sick, stop talking and never recover.  The parents of those children are left absolutely devastated.

If you start surfing around the Internet you can find enough testimonies like this to keep you reading for days on end.

But for the pharmaceutical establishment, a link between must never be admitted between vaccines and autism.  Hundreds of billions of dollars of profits are at stake, and the legal implications of admitting that vaccines cause autism would be absolutely mind blowing.

The big pharmaceutical companies will never, ever, ever, ever admit a link.  And since those companies also spend billions of dollars advertising on the mainstream media, the mainstream media will never admit a link either.

It is all about the money.

So they have to act incredibly puzzled about what is causing cases of autism to dramatically surge in the United States.

And “dramatically surge” is actually an understatement.

It is getting really hard to deny that the epidemic of autism in America is absolutely exploding.  The following is from a recentCNN article….

In 2000 and 2002, the autism estimate was about 1 in 150 children. Two years later 1 in 125 8-year-olds had autism. In 2006, the number was 1 in 110, and the newest data — from 2008 — suggests 1 in 88 children have autism.

So what is causing this?

The mainstream media is floating all kinds of bizarre theories.

But an increasing number of U.S. parents are coming to one conclusion.  Despite overwhelming propaganda in the mainstream media that vaccines do not cause autism, one poll found that one out of every four parents now believe that vaccines cause autism.

So why are so many parents not listening to the “experts”?

Well, it is because of what they have seen in real life.  The following is from a recent Huffington Post article….

It’s a fact that many children with ASD regressed following normal development just as they were receiving multiple vaccines at regular doctor visits. Health officials say the timing is entirely coincidental.

Regression usually occurs between 12 and 24 months, though one study found that some children show signs of autism as early as six months, but never before that age.

By six months of age, most U.S. children have received about 18 inoculations containing 24 vaccines against nine diseases. Over the next two years or so, they will receive another nine shots containing 14 vaccines against 12 diseases.

So whether a child regresses at six months, or 18 months, the tragedy happens during a period of intensive vaccination. In many cases, parents report that the child had an abnormal reaction after being vaccinated (seizures, spiking-fevers, diarrhea, lethargy, high-pitched screaming and/or other symptoms).

If your kid stopped talking within days (or even hours) after receiving a vaccine, how would you feel?

The big pharmaceutical companies have funded many studies to try to show that there is no link between vaccines and autism, but many independent studies contradict the findings of those corporate-funded studies.  The following is from an article by Paul Joseph Watson….

Epidemiologist Tom Verstraeten and Dr. Richard Johnston, an immunologist and pediatrician from the University of Colorado, both concluded that thimerosal was responsible for the dramatic rise in cases of autism but their findings were dismissed by the CDC.

Cases of autism in the U.S. have now increased by over 2700 per cent since 1991, which is when vaccines for children doubled, and the number of immunizations is only increasing. Just one in 2,500 children were diagnosed with autism before 1991, whereas one in 91 children now have the disease, up from one in 150 just six years ago.

So what is so bad is about thimerosal?

Well, thimerosal contains mercury which is one of the most toxic substances known to mankind.  Mercury has been proven to severely impair neurological development.  The following comes directly from the EPA website….

For fetuses, infants, and children, the primary health effect of methylmercury is impaired neurological development. Methylmercury exposure in the womb, which can result from a mother’s consumption of fish and shellfish that contain methylmercury, can adversely affect a baby’s growing brain and nervous system. Impacts on cognitive thinking, memory, attention, language, and fine motor and visual spatial skills have been seen in children exposed to methylmercury in the womb.

So why in the world would we want to pump massive amounts of mercury into our young children when their brains are just starting to develop?

It is literally insane to do this!

Many other countries around the world have recognized this and have banned thimerosal from vaccines.

The following comes from an article by Dawn Prate….

“In 1977, a Russian study found that adults exposed to ethylmercury, the form of mercury in thimerosal, suffered brain damage years later. Studies on thimerosal poisoning also describe tubular necrosis and nervous system injury, including obtundation, coma and death. As a result of these findings, Russia banned thimerosal from children’s vaccines in 1980. Denmark, Austria, Japan, Great Britain and all the Scandinavian countries have also banned the preservative”

So why is it not banned in the United States?

And why do so many American parents still allow it to be pumped at very high levels directly into the bloodstreams of their precious young children?

There are thousands upon thousands of parents that are willing to testify that they would never have allowed their children to be vaccinated if they could go back and do it again.

The following are some testimonies about vaccines and autism that were posted by readers of Organic Health….

Katrina:

My son developed autism after his 15 month vaccinations. It is no surprise considering he took 26 vaccinations up to that point. His fragile system could take no more poison and regressed from speaking 19 words (consistently) at 15 his month check-up to speaking 2 words (infrequently) at his 18 month check-up. I STRONGLY believe doctors are being manipulated/deceived in Medical School……and therefore…….get out only to manipulate/deceive their patients. 3 WORDS…..NEW WORLD ORDER……Research it. I’m glad to see that many of us “sheep” are starting to wake up. This is all biblical revelation by the way. In Revelations, The City of Babylon is said to have “deceived the world with their SORCERY” (greek translation is Pharmekia…..which is Pharmaceuticals!!!!) When are the CHRISTIAN churches going to wake up to this??????

Anonymous:

Well, I have not one, but two children with autism after getting the childhood vaccines. I trusted the doctors who bullied me into it. They talked me into it and said there was relatively little chance my children would have a reaction. Well, after the shots my kids got so sick I had to put both of them in the hospital for 4 days on IVs. Their limbs were limp and they couldn’t hold their heads up – all they could do was lay there and have diarrhea and fevers. I thought they were going to die. After that they were delayed and got autism diagnosis. Now explain with your statistics how many children had autism before the ’80s….1 in 10,000!!! Recently it has been figured at 1/60 -90 depending on the source or state. Statistically there is no such thing as a genetic epidemic. There is likely a genetic component or weakness that is set off by some environmental insult to the system. I’d say a likely culprit is vaccines in combination with our crappy modern diet of highly processed foods and junk plus a lack of proper sunlight and vit D3.

Cindy:

I have had four kids and have never been told or encouraged to get a flu shot from my OBGYN during any of my pregnacies. Please don’t get this vaccine if you are pregnant and don’t give it to your children!! Vaccines cause many illnesses and even deaths. I almost lost my daughter to Autism she was slipping away but I stopped vaccines & she became healthy again. Why would anyone give or allow their newborn child to be injected with these toxins. They are the cause of many of the childhood illnesses & diseases we have today. Autism, ADD, ADHD, Asthma, allergies and others too. There’s alot of info. available to find out more. Please find out the truth for yourself…

Freddie:

When our daughter was 18 mos she had a severe reaction to her immunizations – extremely high temp, inconsolable, and it lasted for days after the shot – it was aweful. She even displayed some signs of autism, which scared us to no end, but finally subsides. We began to be wary of all vaccines and now regret giving the few that we did to our three kids. Of course the Dr’s have all given us a hard time. We homeschool, and I have heard that since homeschooled children usually have less vaccines (the schools require all vaccines to be “up to date”) that there are less incidents of autism. I think a lot of people have made bad decisions in addition to making a lot of money off of vaccines. God did not intend for us to pump toxins into our blood streams. On the back of my kids’ records it says “Baby Shots, A Healthy Dose of Love!” – NOT.

DA:

Do you have any idea how many people I know, mainly little boys, have developed autism after having one of those very small, harmless shots that we’re told are perfectly safe? Nearly a dozen! Without investigating every single thing that is going into our bodies, we are lambs led to slaughter. Our lives and the lives of our kids are at stake. The day the Pharm companies gives vaccines free and they don’t make any money from it, I will trust them more. Until that day, be very cautious that we are all being manipulated for the almighty dollar!

AJD:

Autism is 1:91 with 1:58 boys as of last month. The signs of autism are not visible until the child is at least 12 months old. Until then TAKE CARE. Follow the alternative vaccine schedule posted on GenerationRescue.org. Eat organic foods, cut out sugar and junk foods, take your prenatal vitamins/multi-vitamins after birth and get your vitamin D & B12 levels checked after you give birth. BREASTFEED YOUR BABY FOR AS LONG AS POSSIBLE. In the meantime, extra vitamin A and C are helpful for their developing brains and immune system. Probiotics can be given to a newborn too. TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF & YOUR BABIES NOW…hopefully your child won’t become part of the autism epidemic, or get severe food allergies, automimmune disorders or even cancer in the future. I wish you all the best motherhood has to offer . Sincerely, from a mother living w/autoimmune disorders, who was “vaccine injured” many years ago, with two children, one with autism. Since then, we started on a GFCF diet for the whole family, biomedical intervention for my autistic son, eating more organic foods & taking supplements to boost our health everyday. God bless.

But it isn’t just young children that are being harmed by vaccines.

Thousands upon thousands of pregnant women have lost their babies very shortly after taking vaccines.

Thousands upon thousands of adults have become permanently disabled very shortly after taking vaccines.

If you want to read more, you can find dozens of vaccine horror stories here and here.

The good news is that if your child has autism there is hope.

Once you understand that vaccines can cause autism, it becomes much easier to treat it.  The following is a quote from Dr. Russell Blaylock….

Studies of autistic children have frequently shown very high levels of mercury, with no other source but vaccines found for the exposure. These levels are equal to those seen in adults during toxic industrial exposures. Several autism clinics have found dramatic improvements in the behavior and social interactions in children from whom the mercury was chelated. Results depended on how soon the mercury was removed following exposure, but permanent damage can be caused if the metal is not chelated soon enough. Still, even in cases of severe damage, because of the infant brain’s tremendous reparative ability, improvements are possible. The problem of autism involves numerous body systems including the gastrointestinal, immune and nervous systems; as a result we see numerous infections and magnified effects of malnutrition. Intrepid workers in the shadows, that is outside the medial establishment, have worked many miracles with these children using a multidisciplinary scientific approach completely ignored by the orthodoxy. Some children have even experienced a return to complete physiological normalcy.

So if your child has autism, do not give up hope.

There are things that can be done.

Sadly, authorities all over the nation are responding to the anti-vaccine movement by becoming harsher with parents than ever.

For example, all over America children that have not received all of the “required vaccines” are being banned from school.

In some instances, children are actually being taken away from their parents for not giving them the “proper” vaccines.  In one recent case in Pennsylvania, a social worker took custody of a baby just after it had been born just because the mother would not consent to have the child vaccinated.

This is complete and utter madness.

Shouldn’t parents have the right to determine whether or not their young children will be pumped full of mercury and other toxic substances?

Shouldn’t parents have the right to question whether it is a good idea to inject kids with dozens of vaccines before the age of 3?

But that is not the way that our system works.  The big pharmaceutical companies fund the campaigns of our politicians, and then they get our politicians to bully us into taking their vaccines.

For much more on all of this, please check out an article entitled “Autism & Vaccines” by Barbara Loe Fisher.

There is so much that could be written about this subject, but hopefully this article will get you started.

The key is to do your own research.  Don’t blindly listen to the pharmaceutical companies or to anyone else.

Before you ever decide to vaccinate a child, educate yourself about vaccines as much as possible.

Once again this year, thousands upon thousands of American children will become permanently disabled needlessly.

How bad will autism have to get in America before we all finally admit the truth?