Evolution's record argues against creation as science.

Stephen T. Blume calls evolution a scientific embarrassment, disparaging the great scientists who have thoroughly studied this process in the course of developing the miracle medicines and cures that save lives today.

Blume claims there is absolutely no explanation for the evolution of a heart, or eyes. He appears ignorant of the very gradual development of primitive responses to light gradually developing greater complexity over more than a billion years of adaptation. Today, there are many kinds eyes, some still relatively simple, others highly developed into complex organs. Like many creationists, Blume insists that since he cannot comprehend something, it can't be possible. However, numerous scientists have indeed provided detailed explanations.

He claims the fossil record shows no transitional forms of life, thus showing gross ignorance of the fossil record. While there are huge gaps that creationists point to, there are also fossils that are so continuous that it is almost impossible to show where one species ends and other begins, although from one end of the line to the other, there are clearly different creatures.

I have pages and pages of example of these from scientific documents that are easily found on the Internet. Of course, there are no "fishigators" that Blume requires. That kind of silliness highlights Blume's ignorance of evolution and the gradual transition process.

Creationism as science is the true embarrassment, falsifying claims of scientists and grossly misquoting them, as Stephen Jay Gould often laments. Creationists claim the earth was created 6,000 years ago.

Yet virtually the entire world has been fully populated continuously for far longer than 20,000 years without interruption. The Genesis story of Noah asks us to believe that, less than 6,000 years ago, Noah abruptly gathered all animals from every corner of the earth and got them all into his ark, then promptly returned them to their native lands all over the world with no record of any disruption in 
the natural history.

Modern humans have inhabited the furthest reaches of earth continuously, in distant lands such as Tasmania and the Americas, with no disruption of civilization or for upwards of 10,000 years and, in many places, much longer. Scientists today can identify the changes in the water level of the English channel going back more than 10,000 years and disprove any factuality of the Genesis flood and its accounts of creation.
