Bachmann Irresponsible to Spread Fear of Vaccine.

One of the most alarming public-health developments in recent years has been the emergence of a strident chorus of vaccine fear-mongers who have scared too many parents away from getting their children immunized.

The result has been a comeback of deadly diseases such as whooping cough, mumps and measles. Measles alone killed 3,000 to 5,000 people a year before vaccines emerged to virtually eliminate it in this country. But parents' refusal to vaccinate their kids — spurred largely by unfounded, discredited links between autism and the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine — has let measles creep back. There have been 193 cases so far this year, the largest U.S. outbreak in 15 years.

So it has been deeply disturbing to hear Rep. Michele Bachmann, R-Minn., speaking from the fear-mongers' playbook. During last week's debate in Tampa among the Republican presidential hopefuls, Bachmann described the vaccine against the human papillomavirus (HPV) in sinister terms. Making matters worse, Bachmann told TV interviewers after the debate that a mother had come up to her to say her daughter had become mentally retarded after receiving the HPV vaccination.

Presidential candidates get big megaphones and an outsized opportunity to steer the national debate. But there's an implicit requirement to be careful, and even by the low standards of political speech, Bachmann's nationally broadcast suggestion that a vaccine can cause mental retardation was appallingly irresponsible.

If Bachmann had bothered to check before repeating the story, she would have found that there has been no link between the HPV vaccine and mental retardation after 35 million doses. Though every vaccine can have side effects, those have to be measured against the greater good. HPV causes almost all of the more than 12,000 cases of cervical cancer that occur every year, killing about 4,200 women, and the best time to administer the vaccine is before girls become sexually active.

The HPV vaccine came up during the GOP debate when Bachmann and others criticized Texas Gov. Rick Perry for his 2007 executive order that all girls in the state be vaccinated, while allowing parents to opt out for religious and other reasons. Perry's attempt to mandate vaccination was widely criticized at the time, including by this page, in part because the vaccine was then fairly new and it was unclear whether widespread use would reveal unforeseen side effects. So far, that has not been the case. But another concern — that moving too quickly toward a mandate could promote a backlash — has proved to have more merit.

The Texas Legislature blocked Perry's order, and the issue has resurfaced during the presidential campaign because many conservatives see Perry's action as the sort of big government mandate they detest. Bachmann also suggested that Perry had crossed an ethical line because his former chief of staff had become a lobbyist for Merck, maker of one of the two HPV vaccines, and Merck had donated to Perry's gubernatorial campaign.

Attacking Perry for mandating vaccination and for his ties to the vaccine maker is fair game. But Bachmann's decision to spread scare talk about the vaccine is out of bounds.

The standards for any public figure are higher than, "I'm just passing along something I heard from someone." And they're even higher for someone who wants to be president.