Editorial: Childhood vaccines offer a sure shot.

Studies on vaccine safety continue to show a troubling picture of parents, fearful of possibly harming their children, who are delaying or forgoing vaccinations against childhood diseases, some of which, especially in infants, can be fatal. For example, many are still convinced that vaccines can cause autism, years after a notorious study making that claim was proved false.

A new survey, in the journal Pediatrics, supports previous findings that parents of at least one out of 10 children 6 or younger were delaying or refusing vaccinations because of safety concerns.

It also reported that even among parents whose children were fully vaccinated, about 28 percent think delaying shots is safer that adhering to the prescribed schedule.

To add to pediatric concerns, another recent survey suggests that the pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine for children may lose effectiveness after three years.

So what are responsible parents to do? Dr. LaTanya Love, assistant professor of pediatrics at The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston Medical School, herself a parent, told the Chronicle, "I can understand how some parents feel: We want to do the best for our kids, so if you get any inkling that something could potentially be harmful, it's natural to think twice about it."

The key, she said, is to educate yourself. "If you have fears, if you're maybe considering not getting a vaccine, or going on a different schedule, it's very important to ask, ask, ask your questions. Ask your pediatrician, your family doctor. Go to reliable sources, not the internet. With proper education, proper knowledge, most parents will make smart, informed decisions."

Another factor in some parents' ambivalence, said Love, is that, thanks to the success of vaccination programs, many childhood diseases are not as prevalent as they used to be, so parents may not see the urgency of guarding against them. But they are still around, and can be particularly harmful to babies and young children whose immune systems are still developing.

And now flu season is upon us - more decisions to make. "This time of year is a real challenge," said Love, because of parental ambivalence.

But that's one shot that should be given annually, since each year's flu vaccine is designed to protect against viruses most likely to occur in the upcoming season. And parents should remember that vaccination also protects those kids' baby siblings, their grandparents, their friends and families - the whole community. Cost, often a major reason to forgo preventive care, need not be an issue when it comes to vaccinations. Thanks to Texas Vaccines for Children and local health departments, free and low-cost vaccinations are plentiful. In Houston, call the city's health department at 832-393-5427 or go to houstonhealth.org and click on Immunizations.