Fear and vaccine: It's a public health disaster.

The work of a British researcher purporting to link increased likelihood of autism with childhood vaccinations has been debunked.

Again.

Since Dr. Andrew Wakefield’s study linking autism with vaccines was published 12 years ago in the leading British medical journal, The Lancet, it has caused little more than grief. In 2009, The Lancet retracted the Wakefield paper. Over the years, no less than 18 controlled epidemiological studies have been conducted to investigate the possible link between autism and vaccines.

And? “They have all come back showing the same thing,” says Alison Singer, the founder and president of Autism Science Foundation, a nonprofit that advocates scientific rigor in evaluating the causes of autism. “There is no link between vaccines and autism,” Singer told CNN.com.

The consequences have been ugly: The incidence of measles has surged as tens of thousands of parents in this country and Europe have decided to forgo the vaccinations.

The latest examination of Wakefield’s work, conducted by a British journalist, found that the researchers had altered the facts about patients in their study.

The investigation by journalist Brian Deer, paid for and published by The Sunday Times newspaper of London and a British television network, found that contrary to documentation in Wakefield’s paper, five of the children had developmental problems prior to their vaccinations for measles, mumps and rubella with the MMR vaccine. The paper claimed all 12 children were normal until they had the shot.

In an editorial in the British medical journal BMJ, editor Fiona Godlee and her colleagues pulled no punches. The editors called it “an elaborate fraud.”

We hope that all these pedigreed critiques will at last put this topic to rest.The effectiveness of vaccinations relies in large part on the willingness of most members of a potentially affected population group to be vaccinated.

Since Wakefield’s study was released in 1998, vaccination rates have dropped noticeably, a phenomenon widely attributed to fears of exposure to autism from the MMR shots. As many as 25 percent of parents may be scared away from having their children vaccinated by the Wakefield study. That’s too many.

Measles can kill. The best way to avoid catching them is for children to be vaccinated. Let’s not be scared out of doing that any longer.