New GMO Law Unnecessary.

A new law requires genetically modified food to be so labeled; the good news is that due to built-in qualifications, it can't take effect yet.

With a flourish, in front of an organic-food restaurant in Fairfield, Gov. Dannel P. Malloy ceremonially signed a law making Connecticut the first state to require that food sold here made with genetically modified organisms be so labeled.

But there's a catch, fortunately: The law won't take effect until four other states enact similar legislation. The combined population of the five states must be at least 20 million, and one of the states must border Connecticut.

Those are tough enough qualifications that it's unlikely the law will take effect anytime soon – perhaps ever. That's good. It's an unnecessary, feel-good measure that has little to do with making consumers safer.

"Genetically modified" food has been around forever, or at least since ancient farmers learned that selective breeding for beneficial traits could result in better crops. But for the past two decades, it's been possible to mechanically transplant genes from species to species to achieve the desired result.

Since then, some 2,000 studies have been done on whether food containing GMOs is harmful. Many of those were conducted by entities, such as chemical companies, with a stake in the matter. The rest were done by independent researchers with no connection to agribusiness.

The result? As a recent report looking at 1,783 papers on the subject put it, "the scientific research conducted so far has not detected any significant hazards directly connected with the use of GE [genetically engineered] crops."

The World Health Organization, the American Medical Association, the National Academy of Sciences, and the British Royal Society take the same view.

True, many European countries either require that GMO foods be so labeled or ban them outright. But their governments are almost certainly reacting to political pressure from citizens who have been more influenced by pressure groups and radio talk shows than by science.

As far as labeling goes, it already exists, in a way: Non-GMO food almost always carries the label "USDA Organic." If the package has no such indication, it's a good bet that the product was made with GMOs.

Surely, that's enough for concerned consumers — and without a new law.