Climate change reaching crisis point.

The scientific consensus on climate change is growing grimmer and more definitive. Regrettably, the political will to do something about it, especially in this country, continues to lag.

A draft of the latest U.N. climate report, the fourth update since 1988, underscores the progressive certainty of the scientific community that human activity is a significant factor in the warming of the planet, that its effects are already apparent, and the long-term consequences will be dire if carbon emissions are not curtailed.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which includes several hundred scientists reviewing the published research, concluded there was at least a 95 percent chance that human activity is the principal cause of global warming.

What is beyond dispute for all but the most dedicated climate doubters is that life as we know it is at serious risk. Carbon dioxide levels have increased 41 percent since the Industrial Revolution. They are on course to double within a few decades.

The only real matter of debate within the scientific community is the extent of the temperature increases and the magnitude of the effects. Even the most conservative estimate, an average 2.7 degrees, according to the draft report, would add to the warming ocean, melting glaciers, rising sea level and weather extremes the planet has been experiencing. An increase by 5 degrees Fahrenheit would be catastrophic for everything from food production to the fate of myriad species.

The case for making climate change an international policy priority has been well established through the past two administrations. But President George W. Bush all but neglected the matter for eight years, and President Obama did little more than tinker on the margins of meaningful action during his first term.

This latest scientific judgment should give Obama all the backbone he needs to adhere to his pledge to make climate change a second-term priority. This is the No. 1 challenge of our times. Continued delay and denial are not an option for a global superpower that has the means and the moral, economic and national security interest to take the leadership role it has shamefully avoided.