Evolution Again.

“Intelligent design" may sound like an ad for Scandinavian furniture. But this phrase, coined by a growing movement that opposes the theory of evolution, has become part of a rancorous national debate over the teaching of biology in public schools.

It is turning into an attack on science and the way science is taught to the nation's students. That is deeply disturbing to scientists, and it ought to be of equal concern to parents, teachers and officials who approve public school curricula.

This debate, pivoting on whether a quasi-religious metaphysical concept - intelligent design - should be taught as real science in biology class, has gained political weight, thanks to recent comments made by President George W. Bush and Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tenn.)

"Both sides ought to be properly taught so people can understand what the debate is about," Bush said, referring to intelligent design and the theory of evolution. "I think that part of education is to expose people to different schools of thought."

Echoing similar sentiments, Frist last week said intelligent design should be taught in public schools alongside evolution. Superficially, there is nothing wrong with either leader's statement. Hashing out an important intellectual debate is part of education. The critical question, implicit in Bush's careful phrasing, is how both sides of this debate should be "properly taught."

It's fine to expose students to the opposing views of proponents of intelligent design vs. evolutionary theory - in a social studies class where political issues belong. That's the "proper" - to use Bush's word - venue for such discussions. It's not "proper" to teach intelligent design alongside the theory of evolution in a science class, where students are schooled in the roles of physical evidence, and the replicable proof of experiments, not metaphysical concepts that by their very nature cannot be proved but only accepted on the basis of faith.

A quick primer on the two concepts: Evolution. The theory of evolution has generated controversy since Charles Darwin published "The Origin of the Species" 147 years ago. In that seminal work, Darwin laid out exhaustive evidence to assert that organisms adapted to their environment through random mutations, which accounted for the evolution of species into ever more advanced life forms, including humans.

Intelligent design: It is the idea that the complexity of living beings can be best explained as the result of a conscious design by an intelligent entity as opposed to evolution by natural selection. It is a nuanced version of creationism, the belief that the Bible's descriptions of the world's origins are literally true.

The injection of politics into this intellectual debate was cynically opportunistic. Bush, and then Frist - a Harvard-educated physician - stoked this incendiary argument by injecting themselves into it. Then again, the Bush administration has shown its anti-scientific bent over and over, from its opposition to funding stem-cell research to its devaluing of data supporting global warming.

Back to the past.

It appears that American society is entering another anti-scientific phase on evolution. Some education boards, in Pennsylvania and Kansas, among others, include intelligent design as a critique of evolutionary theory in biology classes already. This comes at a time when the nation is slipping badly, compared to its Asian and European rivals, in developing enough young scientists, including biologists.

Bush and Frist come close to pandering to the part of their core constituency, the religious right, that deeply believes in creationism, which attributes the development of life and all species to God alone. But far more unfortunate is the attack on science that lies behind the push for intelligent design to be taught in school.

Unlike creationism, which has been denied a place in public classrooms by two separate Supreme Court decisions hinging on the separation of church and state, intelligent design does not attribute divinity to the "intelligent designer." It doesn't even call the designer God, or a "creator," but simply an "entity" or "agency."

The irony is that ardent creationists, among them Sen. Rick Santorum (R-Pa.), reject intelligent design as a subject to be taught in schools because it does not attribute the creation of life to God.

A historic slugfest.

There is nothing new in the clash between creationists, who insist on literal Biblical explanations for the start and development of life, and scientists, who accept the validity of the theory of evolution.

The clash resulted most famously in the so-called "monkey trial" of 1925, in which teacher John Scopes was convicted of violating Tennessee's ban on the teaching of evolution in public schools. Back then, two other states, Florida and Oklahoma, also prohibited the teaching of Darwin's theory in biology classes. All such laws, however, were invalidated by a Supreme Court decision in 1968, which allowed evolution to be taught.

In response, several states quickly resorted to requiring that "creation science" be taught alongside evolution. But that stratagem failed, too. The Supreme Court ruled, in 1982 and 1987, that teaching creationism in public schools, even alongside evolution, violated the First Amendment's principle of the separation of church and state because creationism was based on religious rather than scientific principles.

Today's version.

That should have put an end to the controversy. But it didn't, and now the debate surges again, in a more sophisticated form through which creationism creeps under the quasi-scientific cloak of intelligent design. The concept, put forward by a group of scientists who are ardent Christians, hinges on the idea that living organisms show a degree of complexity so exquisite that it cannot be explained through random mutation and natural selection. To devise such finely complex organisms, they argue, requires the intervention of an "intelligent agency."

To be sure, proponents of intelligent design never buy into the literal Biblical interpretations dear to creationists. To many, this is an appealing idea. It purges the debate of the notion of divinity, which would put it squarely in violation of Supreme Court rulings.

But the problem is that there is no way to prove, in a scientifically valid way, the existence of an intelligent designer. That's a metaphysical concept that can only be accepted on faith. Instead, the bold assumptions that Darwin made on the inheritability of variations based on natural selection are constantly supported by new data in genetics, physics and biochemistry.

Although, clearly, there is a limit to what science can explain - that is where metaphysics does come in.

Giving intelligent design a place in biology classes alongside evolution would only muddle the minds of young people who will question the validity of the scientific method when confronted with an explanation that has no scientific validity but masquerades as science.

Let's not go down the road to another Scopes trial. The nation will be the worse for it.