Inoculation of truth: Link between vaccines, autism ruled out. Let vaccination system do its important work.

The U.S. Court of Claims has ruled out widely claimed links between vaccines and autism in children. The legal ruling, handed down last week, comes behind several well-credentialed scientific studies that long ago debunked a link between autism and vaccines.

The decision by the so-called “people’s court” carries an air of finality that clearly was intended to reassure and comfort anxious parents even as it denied their claims.

We hope that it will be a reassurance to these parents, while also providing a needed vote of confidence in our vaccination system.

An effective and widely followed vaccination program is a linchpin of modern public health. Since the late ’90s that has been adversely affected by parental concerns about a link between autism and vaccinations.

While expressing sympathy for the plight of children with autism and their families, the court’s special master said the evidence of a link is “weak, contradictory and unpersuasive,” adding that the families had been victims of bad science.

Autism impairs a child’s ability to communicate and interact. In 1998, a British study linked the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, better known as MMR, with a group of autistic children who also have serious gastrointestinal problems. In the years since, several scientific studies have ruled out a connection. Meanwhile, however, more than 5,000 claims have been filed with the government by families seeking compensation.

Over the years, parents have been effectively organized as litigants and pressure groups. In the public claims court’s ruling last week, its special master made specific mention of litigants who had been victimized by “bad science conducted to support litigation rather than to advance medical and scientific understanding” of autism.

It gives us no pleasure to say so, but in the end science must trump emotion, no matter how heartfelt. The nation’s vaccination programs must be allowed to continue their important work. It’s time to clear the cloud of questions and doubts raised by this well-meaning but evidently misguided effort.