Nuclear power in America: Five reasons why it's safe and reliable.

Though the crisis at Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant appears to be stabilizing, the United States is stepping up inspections of the country’s 104 nuclear reactors. The US Nuclear Regulatory Commission today announced that inspectors will soon visit all US reactors to ensure they can withstand the kind of “severe accident” that led to Japan’s emergency. That emergency has caused many Americans to wonder about the future of nuclear power. Is it safe and dependable? Yes, says Tony Pietrangelo, chief nuclear officer and senior vice president of the Nuclear Energy Institute (the organization of the nuclear energy and technologies industry). Here’s why:

1. Nuclear is safe. Commercial nuclear power plants in the United States have produced electricity for over half a century, and there have been no radiation-related deaths linked to their operation. Studies by numerous health entities, including the National Cancer Institute and the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, show that US nuclear power plants effectively protect the public’s health and safety.

The US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) regulates the commercial and institutional uses of nuclear energy, including nuclear power plants. These plants are designed, licensed, constructed, and operated to rigorous requirements established by the NRC. Additionally, the NRC has a continuing inspection and oversight process with on-site resident inspectors and periodic inspection teams to ensure compliance with regulations and associated programs.

Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the nation’s nuclear power plants voluntarily performed comprehensive reviews of catastrophic events and implemented mitigation strategies to further bolster their preparedness. These site-specific reviews were conducted by teams that included the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Energy, and Federal Bureau of Investigation.

While it will take some time to fully understand the events at the tsunami-stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, we will evaluate the lessons from the events at Fukushima and apply them to make US nuclear plants even safer.

2. Nuclear is reliable. Today, the United States depends on nuclear energy for 20 percent of the electricity that powers the country’s economy and strengthens energy security. Our 104 nuclear power plants operate on average more than 90 percent of the time. In comparison, hydro, wind, and solar have average capacity factors in the range of 24 to 30 percent. This makes nuclear energy one of the most reliable sources of electricity in the world. As we plan for our future, we must continue to utilize and build upon this historically reliable supply of electricity.

3. Nuclear is efficient. A 1,000-megawatt nuclear power plant operating 90 percent of the time generates enough electricity to power 740,000 homes. Based on information from the US Energy Information Administration, it would take the following use of other resources to achieve the same result:

Oil: 13.7 million barrels

Coal: 3.4 million short tons

Natural Gas: 65.8 billion cubic feet

Utilizing nuclear energy as part of a diverse fleet of electric generation is an efficient use of precious natural resources while doing so with virtually no carbon emissions.

4. Nuclear is economic. Nuclear plant operations, maintenance, and fuel costs are the lowest among the major sources (nuclear, coal, gas, and petroleum) for power generation in the United States. On average, it costs just over two cents per kilowatt-hour to generate electricity with nuclear power. This equates to low-cost clean energy for consumers and businesses that drive the economic engine.

5. Nuclear is necessary. US electricity demand is projected to increase 24 percent by 2035. Yet over the next decade, eight gigawatts of coal-fired electric generating capacity will retire, according to the Energy Information Administration. We should recognize that the vast majority of our non-hydroelectric generating plants operating today will need to be retired and replaced over the next 30-to-40 years. Like their predecessors, many of these needed replacement plants must generate large amounts of electricity and operate 24 hours per day to “keep the lights on” for all of us. Our needs demand they not operate intermittently based on the availability of their fuel source, which can be an issue with some non-traditional resources. As we increasingly emphasize a low-carbon economy, our need for clean electric generating capacity will grow. Nuclear energy fills this role.