Climate outlook grows bleaker, major shifts required now.

The latest report from the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change turns up the heat on world leaders to act swiftly and decisively against climate change. The panel foresees a catastrophic future of flooding, food and water shortages, mass migration and global insecurity.

When will national governments - including ours - heed their call?

The report was authored by hundreds of scientists and experts who hail from dozens of countries all around the world. It's considered to be the most comprehensive assessment to date of the impacts of climate change, both present and future.

The 837 researchers insist that the evidence of climate change is overwhelming, and that while the natural environment has thus far borne the brunt of rising temperatures, the impact on humans is already growing.

Of particular interest are the shifts in scientists' estimates of how climate change will affect food production.

The report says that the yields of major food crops (corn, wheat, and rice) will begin to decline in 2030 and continue declining up to 2 percent per decade. That reduction is especially worrying because demand for food is expected to increase in the coming years by about 2 percent per year.

Rapid price increases of food are especially concerning to national governments, since they frequently precipitate political instability.

"Over the next few decades, the climate change we experience will be determined primarily by the combination of past actions and current trends," says the report.

Our "past actions" thus far have not been encouraging.

For decades, countries have tried and failed to reach a binding consensus on greenhouse gas reductions. Now, the developed world's (extremely mild) reductions are being engulfed by increases in developing nations.

The only hope lies in adapting our policies to mitigate the worst impacts of climate change - and that will mean weaning ourselves off of fossil fuels and changing our construction and agricultural policies. It's a tall order - but the alternative is worse, and it won't be stopped by wishing it away.