Japan's nuclear anxiety worst in the world.

No country has suffered from the dark side of atomic energy more than Japan. So it's particularly distressing now to watch Japan suffer from a full-blown nuclear crisis, as a result of the massive 9.0 earthquake that rocked the island nation last week.

Multiple reactors have gone into partial meltdown. Technicians are scrambling to contain the damage. The next 48 hours will be critical to preventing a total disaster.

While there haven't been reports of mass radioactive exposure yet, thousands who live near the plants are being evacuated, putting further strain on a country attempting to manage the catastrophic damage from the earthquake and ensuing tsunami. Worst of all, there's the possibility that more Japanese reactors could overheat and face meltdowns. The crisis could last for weeks, and Japan has asked for international assistance to prevent a nuclear disaster.

Meanwhile, Japan's trauma has upended a growing consensus for nuclear power in the United States. Thirty-two years after the accident at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania, and 25 years after the disaster in Chernobyl, the meltdown threat was receding in the public consciousness.

At the very least, nuclear power didn't seem any more dangerous than coal or oil - two industries that have had major disasters in the United States this year. President Obama endorsed nuclear power as a way around climate change and the country's dependence on foreign oil. Even environmental groups were slowly warming to the idea.

Suddenly, nuclear doesn't seem so safe. The truth is that it never has been. As we're learning from Japan, it's impossible to ensure full stability with the nuclear energy production process. Japan was known for being extraordinarily cautious with its nuclear energy plants and safety procedures, and disaster still struck. All that means is that there are too many contingencies and too many opportunities for things to go wrong.

The fact that the nuclear industry has been stagnant in the United States for decades suggests another danger - were we to begin building nuclear plants again, Americans may not have the expertise to tackle anything that does go wrong.

Given all of these concerns, even some of nuclear energy's staunchest advocates are now calling for caution. We have to agree, especially since we need to learn the lessons of Japan before proceeding with any new plants. At the very least, the idea of building new plants in earthquake-prone areas like California gives us serious pause.