Lessons from Japan.

Even as the situation continues to unfold, it is clear that Japan's high-stakes fight to contain a disaster at a crippled nuclear power plant will yield vital lessons for America, and for every other nation looking to atomic energy for deliverance from oil.

One lesson is already apparent: We underestimate nature, and overestimate our technological prowess, at our peril.

And so is another: A nuclear plant failure isn't just another mishap. It is a grave disaster with potentially devastating consequences, both short- and long-term.

Yet, some proponents of nuclear power say that this country should proceed apace with the relicensing of aging nuclear power plants and the permitting and construction of new ones. Even as an anxious world waits to see if Japan can bring the situation at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant under control, President Obama and Energy Secretary Steven Chu are pressing for loan guarantees for new plants.

To be sure, most potent sources of energy aren't risk free. Burning fossil fuels brings pollution and the possibility of a major accident. A single off-shore oil well spill can threaten the entire Gulf of Mexico and the livelihoods of millions. A leak of what's so pleasantly referred to as "clean burning natural gas" can ravage a community, as it did in the Schoharie County town of Blenheim in 1990. Decades of coal burning in the Midwest killed numerous Adirondack lakes.

But the inherent risk is much higher with nuclear energy. As you read this, an estimated 185,000 people have been evacuated from an area within a roughly 12-mile radius of the Fukushima Daiichi plant; as far out as 18 miles another 140,000 people have fled, too, or are sealed in their homes. Several times so far, workers have had to stop trying to deal with a looming meltdown because of high radiation levels. U.S. naval ships backed off as a precaution. As we write this on Wednesday, we have no idea whether Thursday will be better, or worse. And the long-term health consequences are yet to be known.

Congress must ensure that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and nuclear power industry learn the still-emerging lessons from Japan, before talking about relicensing or building more nuclear power plants.

Are existing laws and regulations sufficient? Is the NRC adequately funded and run independently of the industry it oversees? Are plant construction and safety measures really based on worst case scenarios, or could plants be better protected against a rare but entirely possible earthquake, tsunami, storm, plane crash, terrorist attack or other disaster? Have corners been cut under some misguided mantra of getting government out of the way of business? And don't forget, we're still waiting for this country to implement a credible solution for permanent disposal of nuclear waste.

This is one job Congress needs to do in a nonpartisan, non-ideological way, at arms length from the influence of lobbyists and campaign contributions. This is not a mere political debate where we get to shrug our shoulders if we're wrong and say, "Oh well."