Religion, science and civility.

Judge John Jones III issued a compelling decision Tuesday, ruling that "intelligent design" is religion, not science, and can't be taught in public school classrooms. In theory, the federal court ruling is binding only on the Dover Area School District in central Pennsylvania. But it is likely to have much wider influence. That's good because there's far more of value here than legal argument. There's wisdom.

In the decision, Jones cuts through much of the confusion swirling around intelligent design and evolution, providing Americans a sharply drawn primer in the difference between science and religion. Evolution, tested by a century and a half of research and observation, is science. Intelligent design, or ID, is religion because it suggests an unprovable supreme being as the "designer" of all life.

Note that the judge distinguished science from religion. He did not declare one superior or subordinate to the other. In explaining why, he not only solved a classroom crisis, but offered Americans a wise and intriguing way to think about the nexus of science and religion.

This part didn't make headlines. But deep in the opinion, here's what Jones wrote: "... [M]any of the leading proponents of ID make a bedrock assumption which is utterly false. Their presupposition is that evolutionary theory is antithetical to a belief in the existence of a supreme being and to religion in general." In the trial, the judge continued, the scientific experts who testified against ID said "that the theory of evolution represents good science, is overwhelmingly accepted by the scientific community, and that it in no way conflicts with, nor does it deny, the existence of a divine creator."

In other words, science and religion--evolution and intelligent design--can exist together; they are not mutually exclusive. That's an important message that has been trampled as many rush to the barricades, taking sides in what's been billed as another "culture war."

Because the battleground is the classroom--our kids--the vitriol has been thick. To be clear: The ruling doesn't mean it's taboo for individual teachers to mention "creationism" or "intelligent design" in the proper context. As Glenn Branch, deputy director of the National Center for Science Education, has said: "Religious advocacy is what's forbidden, but acknowledging that there are religious controversies and objections around evolution is another thing. It would be perfectly acceptable for there to be a discussion of the fact that there are religious objections to evolution."

What's not acceptable is to proselytize in the classroom, or to stray from real science.

The argument about evolution has provoked legal skirmishes for decades. It won't stop here.

On a larger scale, this debate is about the limits of science and the limitless depths of faith. There will always be room for different explanations and beliefs on the origins of life--and important constitutional limits on what can be said in the classroom.

By writing that science and religion need not be sworn enemies, however, Jones offers Americans something valuable: a way to think and talk, respectfully, about issues that divide us.