Measles outbreak may be another symptom of vaccine deniers: Editorial.

Measles cases are at their highest level in nearly two decades -- a sign that the crazies may be spreading, too.

These outbreaks are helped along by parents who withhold their children from vaccines because of personal beliefs. Those beliefs are helped along by irresponsible people such as television host Jenny McCarthy, pushing anti-vaccination fringe theories and paranoia.

Overall vaccination rates in New Jersey are among the lowest in the nation. A small but growing group of parents are willing to ignore all mainstream scientific advice and put their kids at risk. Why?

Consider the findings of an intriguing new poll: The further we get from our own bodies and the present, the more doubts Americans have about science -- and when it rubs up against their values and beliefs, forget it. Science rarely wins.

We've seen this on global warming and evolution, too.

Many scientific findings are broadly accepted: Few Americans question that smoking causes cancer, that mental illness is a medical condition that affects the brain, or that there's a genetic code inside our cells, the poll by the Associated Press and GfK research company found.

Yet as many as 15 percent have doubts about the safety and efficacy of childhood vaccines.

McCarthy's claim that vaccines cause autism was later debunked. But the damage was done. We have virtually eradicated scores of once-fatal epidemics thanks to immunization, yet because these diseases have fallen out of sight, people forget about them. Instead, they worry over the miniscule risk of some ill effect from the vaccine itself, and seek out fringe spokespeople to validate that paranoia.

Measles spreads quickly and easily through the air, and since many doctors have never seen it in their lifetimes, they may not recognize the symptoms. Parents who prioritize their personal beliefs above the advice of mainstream experts are not just putting their own kids at risk. They're jeopardizing the health of everybody.