Baby, it's cold outside, but globe is warming: Our view.

Call it the polar vortex. Or the arctic invasion. By whatever name, January is ending as one of the most frigid months in decades in parts of the north-central and eastern United States.

Tuesday's weather map in USA TODAY looked like a Democrat's dream: 48 of the 50 states had shades of blue. By the time President Obama got to the climate change portion of his State of the Union Address that night, a rare snowstorm in the Deep South was spawning an epic traffic jam in Atlanta, paralyzing Birmingham, whitening Myrtle Beach and icing Pensacola.

So does all this suggest global warming is, well, a crock?

No, but it does provide fodder for comedy, not to mention denial and skepticism. Sen James Inhofe, R-Okla., said this month's cold spell "has to make everyone question ... whether global warming was ever real." Donald Trump tweeted that "this very expensive GLOBAL WARMING bull---- has got to stop."

Such ignorance would be easy to dismiss if polls didn't show that the number of Americans who believe the world is warming has declined, from 85% in 2006 to 73% in 2013. Another survey shows that an unusually hot or cold season can shift public opinion on climate change.

So here are some things to keep in mind as you try to square your frozen driveway with a warming world:

Local isn't global. This month's severe cold isn't affecting the whole planet, or even the whole USA. The same weather pattern that has funneled frigid air into Chicago and Minneapolis has brought unusual warmth to Alaska and severe drought to California. Even more to the point, the USA covers just 2% of Earth's surface. Australia had its hottest year on record last year and experienced temperatures this month as high as 118.
Weather isn't climate. Weather is what happens moment to moment in the atmosphere; climate is the long-term average of weather over time in particular places. As an adage puts it, climate is what you expect, and weather is what you get. Global warming doesn't preclude cold snaps, even severe ones.
The climate trends are overwhelming. Earth had its fourth-warmest year on record in 2013, and all of the 10 warmest years on record have occurred since 1998, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported last week.

It is true, as the skeptics like to point out, that long-term climate modeling remains an inexact science. Some environmentalists hurt their cause by leaping to blame every extreme weather event on global warming. And a changing climate produces winners as well as losers.

But climate scientists are 95% to 100% sure that human activity — emission of greenhouse gases — is the dominant cause of dramatic warming. That warming is already raising sea levels, acidifying oceans, melting glaciers and intensifying heat waves, downpours, droughts and wildfires.

January's cold snap has caused plenty of misery. The damage will only be compounded if it becomes an excuse for yet another year of denial and delay in addressing climate dangers.