Your higher electric bill.

First the good news: There’s no good reason the new EPA regulations on carbon emissions should mean higher electric bills for New Yorkers.

Now the bad news: There’s every political reason it will.

In states that depend heavily on coal for their energy, the new EPA carbon limits will probably have residents paying more for their energy. That’s because it makes operating coal plants more difficult and uneconomical, and many are likely to shut down. The alternatives will likely be more expensive.

New York should not have that problem — because we have two great coal alternatives that could meet the lower emissions standards and even lower prices: nuclear energy and fracking for natural gas.

Unfortunately, we have a governor who has spent the past few years making business more difficult for both.

Let’s start with nuclear. The advantage of nuclear energy is that it is cleaner than coal and can supply much of our energy needs. The Indian Point nuclear plant, just 45 minutes north of Manhattan, already supplies 25% to 30% of our energy needs.

But Andrew Cuomo was a foe of Indian Point even before he was elected governor. He’s on record as wanting to close down the plant on the grounds that it poses a safety threat to the community.

Here’s the problem: Any realistic substitute for nuclear energy would likely mean more air pollution.

Then there’s fracking, which is celebrated by the Obama administration as a safe, green source of energy that is helping America become more energy-independent. But not for Cuomo.

While the rest of the nation enjoys the bounty from fracking — jobs for workers and lower energy prices for consumers — Cuomo has kept the future of fracking in New York in limbo by refusing to make a decision (at least before the 2016 Democratic presidential primaries) to go forward.

All of which means that New Yorkers, who already pay some of the highest electric bills in the nation, are going to face even higher prices.

Sure, we can thank the EPA’s new rules for some of this, as they put the squeeze on some traditional energy sources.

But we will have Gov. Cuomo to thank most for creating a system that prevents New Yorkers from enjoying the advantages of cleaner, more efficient energy.