7 Marketing Lies in a Vaccination Campaign Exposed.

I have seen many advertising campaigns over the years promoting vaccinations but a recent vaccination advertising promotion by the NHS (National Health Service) Portsmouth, Hampshire UK (1) is one of the worst that I have ever seen. In my opinion it is full of propaganda and lies, intended to scare parents into vaccinating their children.

Let’s examine the NHS promotional video in detail.

The video begins with a series of images portraying a family of superheroes together with typical super hero music playing in the background along with the captions:
 
Be a hero! Protect your child! X-ray vision and super strength are all very good but you can be a hero by doing just one simple thing for your child! Get them immunized: Childhood vaccinations like the MMR may not sound as exciting as saving the planet but they really important and prevent serious illness and even death!

Exposed Lie #1: ‘Be a Hero!’

Giving your child vaccinations does not automatically qualify you as a hero. We all want to be a hero in our children’s eyes. I believe this can only be achieved by giving them love, care and keeping them safe.

The only people that will think that you are a hero for vaccinating your child are the pharmaceutical industries who manufacture the vaccines and the governments who sanction them.

To state that by giving children vaccinations automatically makes parents into instant heroes, is propaganda and a marketing ploy intended to force parents into taking up the recommended vaccination schedule.

Exposed Lie #2: ‘Protect your child!’

Vaccines include the following ingredients:

Acetone (solvent used in fingernail polish remover). Aluminum hydroxide. Aluminum phosphate. Aluminum sulfate. Amphotericin B. Animal tissues: pig blood, horse blood, rabbit brain, Dog kidney, monkey kidney. Chick embryo, chicken egg, duck egg. Calf (bovine) serum. Betapropiolactone. Fetal bovine serum. Formaldehyde. Formalin. Gelatin. Glycerol. Human diploid cells (originating from human aborted fetal tissue). Hydrolyzed gelatin. Monosodium glutamate (MSG). Neomycin (antibiotic). Neomycin sulfate. Phenol red indicator. Phenoxyethanol (antifreeze). Potassium diphosphate. Potassium monophosphate. Polymyxin B. Polysorbate 20. Polysorbate 80. Porcine (pig) pancreatic hydrolysate of casein. Residual MRC5 proteins. Sorbitol. Sucrose. Streptomycin (antibiotic). Thimerosal (mercury). Tri(n)butylphosphate (neurotoxin). VERO cells, a continuous line of monkey kidney cells. Washed sheep red blood cells.

Do you seriously believe that by vaccinating all of these ingredients into a healthy child that you are going to help protect your child? If so, I urge you to think again because it has been proven that these ingredients can cause children to suffer from convulsions, ADHD, autism, allergies, childhood obesity, sudden infant death syndrome, encephalitis, anaphylaxis, eczema and diabetes to name but a few. 

Still do not believe me? Have a look around the VAERS (Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System) and you may decide to think again. 

Exposed Lie #3: ‘Get them Immunized’

Immunization is not the same as vaccination. This is explained in great detail by Dr Tim O’Shea in his book ‘Vaccination Is Not Immunization’ He states and this is very important:

Vaccination is merely the artificial triggering of temporary responses to manmade pathogens. Immunity? That’s a different topic altogether.

Dr O’Shea goes on to quote Australian scientist Dr Viera Sheibner, PhD who says:

There is only one immunity, natural immunity, which is achieved by going through the infectious diseases of childhood.

In his book Dr O’Shea quotes the French scientist Dr Xavier Raspail who explained that even if a child is vaccinated against an illness it does not mean that they are now immune to ever catching the illness. Children are still catching the diseases that they are vaccinated against. This is because when an antigen is injected into the body it will produce a reaction and the immune system indicates it’s response in the form of antibodies, their presence will not protect i.e. immunize.

The NHS Portsmouth video continues by stating:

Exposed Lie #4: ‘Vaccinations help protect your child against all these evil characters:

Measles. Mumps. Rubella. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Tetanus. Polio. Meningitis C. Pneumococcal Infection. HIB. HPV’. Children have been known to catch all of these illnesses even after vaccination.

Dr Viera Scheibner writes:

I have not found a single paper which would demonstrate that in epidemic situations only unvaccinated children contracted the diseases. Even during vaccine trials many children contracted the diseases against which they were vaccinated, often within a few days.

The Alternative Doctor writes:

Even if you run the risk of vaccinating your child can still get the disease, and many measles deaths, for example, are in kids under the age of vaccination.

“What they don’t tell you is that a child who receives the MMR vaccine can still get measles. In an outbreak of measles in Texas in 1987, 96 percent of the cases were considered non-preventable. In other words, all the measles cases were either fully vaccinated, had a religious or medical exemption or were born before 1957…..According to the Panhandle Health District, 85 percent of the documented cases of pertussis had 4 out of 4 of their DPT shots and 15 percent had 3 out of 4 of their DPT shots……….The CDC statistics for this outbreak in all five northern counties states that out of 253 reported cases, 81.5 percent were fully vaccinated or had 4 out of 4 of their DPT shots.” -Ingri Cassel.

“Tetanus is a very rare disease in developed countries: there are only about 12 cases of tetanus per year in Australia, and half of those who got it were vaccinated.” -Viera Scheibner.

so much for the oft repeated mantra “vaccine preventable disease”.

The NHS Portsmouth video then states:

Exposed Lie #5: ‘And don’t forget vaccinations are safe! Without them your child is at risk!’

All medications and vaccinations carry the risk of possible side effects, this is a known fact, if they did not, then why is a list of ‘possible side effects’ always included on drug and vaccination inserts and why do reporting systems exist to report adverse reactions?

Your child IS at risk from adverse reactions to vaccinations and therefore cannot be guaranteed safety.

The Alternative Doctor writes:

Contrary to a very popular government lie, the vaccines aren’t safe unless you stretch the definition of “safe” to include death, numerous diseases, and serious brain damage. They have paid out for 900 children (UK) with serious brain damage from DPT vaccines, but now deny it (“science has moved on” is the phrase used), saying on their leaflets DPT doesn’t cause brain damage! How come vaccines can cause serious brain damage, & death but somehow not autism?

Some vaccines are less dangerous than others. Safe is breastfeeding, which incidentally, is natural immunization, also ignored and downplayed.

Quite right to breastfeeding is safe; however, worried that breastfeeding might actually help children to gain natural immunity, some healthcare experts are now recommending delaying breastfeeding to allow the vaccinations to take effect. 

The NHS Portsmouth video continues by then stating:

Exposed Lie #6: ‘Your child is at risk without them?’

Your child is perfectly safe without vaccines. Saying that they are at risk without them is propaganda told to parents by the pharmaceutical industries and governments to scare them into having their children vaccinated and is a marketing ploy used to sell vaccinations.

One of my favorite articles explaining just how safe unvaccinated children are is written by Homeopath and G.P Dr Jayne Donegan who writes:

We vaccinate against lots of childhood diseases now because we are told that having the diseases is a bad thing and leads to thousands of deaths. However, when we look at the figures from the Office for National Statistics, we see that 95% of the people who used to die from measles stopped dying before the vaccine was introduced in 1968 and similarly 99% of the people who used to die of whooping cough. The mortality rate for tuberculosis fell no differently in countries that did and did not use the BCG vaccine. Scarlet fever, rheumatic fever and typhus were deadly killers. They all disappeared without a vaccine.

To learn more and understand why this is I urge parents to read the full article.

The NHS Portsmouth video then states:

Exposed Lie #7: ‘NHS Portsmouth is determined to immunize as many children as possible.’

The only way this is at all possible is to allow children to grow up unvaccinated and to allow their own immune systems to do the job it was designed to do.

This video proves that this is not NHS Portsmouth’s intention.

Anna Watson from the group Arnica explains natural immunity in her two videos.

Anna runs the support group Arnica (11) whose mission is to guide parents into using a more natural approach to healthcare. The group does not believe in vaccination. Arnica states:

“At Arnica we believe in the importance of Natural Immunity.”

Parents and health practitioners meet up regularly, formally and informally, and use the Yahoo group to discuss vaccine issues and keeping healthy. We also share good practice and evidence on how we can support our children naturally when they are sick (skills no longer passed down from our parents), like dealing with fever and cleaning wounds, for example.

When we compare a vaccine’s adverse reactions, and possible longer-term health problems, against complications from childhood disease in healthy children, we feel that in most cases no studies have been done to compare the health of these groups.”

The only truth in the NHS Portsmouth vaccination promotion is in the last small section, which states:

‘But we need your help to do this! Remember Immunization could save their life! So go on Mum go on Dad be a hero protect your child! Speak to your nurse today!’

Yes Immunization could help save your child’s life and the only way to immunize your child against childhood disease is to allow them to build up their own immunity. I repeat once again what Dr Scheibner has said:

There is only one immunity, natural immunity, which is achieved by going through the infectious diseases of childhood.

I have tried to demonstrate that it is not always wise to believe everything that your local healthcare provider tells you. As the NHS Portsmouth video demonstrates much of the promotional material used today to advertise vaccination is propaganda and lies uniquely designed to peddle drugs and vaccines as effectively as possible.



