Belief in God doesn't undermine evolution: Column.

Religion shouldn't get in the way of science, and vice versa.

This week's survey by the Pew Research Center's Religion and Public Life Project shows that 60% of Americans believe that "humans and other living things have evolved over time." That means most Americans accept evolution.

This also means that many of those who are religious and believe in God, also believe in evolution. They don't view evolution as a threat to faith.

Both atheists and religionists polarize the debate. Atheists sometimes wield evolution as a hatchet to discredit religion, and religionists sometimes claim that evolution is incompatible with faith because it does not conform to a literal reading of the Bible's Book of Genesis.

Column: Zero-tolerance stupidity at school.

Despite this, significant percentages see religion and evolution as compatible. In fact, roughly 24% of adults said they believe "a supreme being guided the evolution of living things." And over 90% of Americans believe in God, which further reinforces that, to many, the belief in God is not incompatible with accepting evolution. Even 51% of scientists are reported to "believe in some form of deity or higher power."

Several prominent scientists, like Dr. Francis Collins, adopt the view that evolution compliments faith, while others, like Stephen Jay Gould, maintain that religion and science represent to different non-mutually exclusive understandings of the world.

Theistic evolutionist, Dr. Collins, former director of the Human Genome Project, says, "evolution by descent from a common ancestor is clearly true. If there was any lingering doubt about the evidence from the fossil record, the study of DNA provides the strongest possible proof of our relatedness to all other living things."

In its publication Science and Creationism, the National Academy of Sciences adopted the view that "science and religion occupy two separate realms of human experience. Demanding that they be combined detracts from the glory of each."

Prominent atheist Richard Dawkin's describes the belief that God influenced evolution as an attempt to "(smuggle) God in by the backdoor." Ironically, Young Earth creationists share Dawkin's disdain claiming that accepting evolution undermines literal biblical teachings by regarding the creation story as a parable or allegory.

Perhaps Dawkin's doesn't know that Charles Darwin himself never said that evolution had to be Godless or directionless. Nothing about evolution disproves God or religion. It is simply a sound scientific understanding of our origins. It doesn't prove nor disprove a God claim.

The Young Earth creationists should also stop using religion as a wedge against science, by trying to misleadingly fit science into preconceived biblical narrative.

The atheists and religious should not present an either-or proposition between belief in God and acceptance of evolution. It does not have to be one or the other.

It is nice to see a healthy percentage of religious people rise above the false-dichotomy and divisiveness to find a harmonious balance that accepts evolution and faith simultaneously.

