Nuclear power is our future.

With the intention of protecting the people of New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo has embarked on a crusade against nuclear power that will endanger his constituents and cost them — on their energy bill and at the doctor's office.

Nuclear power is a clean energy source that produces electricity without emitting any of the pollutants associated with fossil fuels, including greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane, deadly particulates, nitrogen oxide, and sulfur dioxide. Reductions in these pollutants would alleviate global warming, mitigate environmental hazards like acid rain, and tackle the thousands of deaths a year caused by the combustion of fossil fuels.

Nuclear power is essentially renewable, since the uranium-based fuel used is virtually inexhaustible. Furthermore, although nuclear plants consume more water than fossil fuel plants, they require far less than other renewable options like hydropower, geothermal, and solar.

Moreover, nuclear power is only responsible for five percent of hazardous waste in this country, while it contributes nearly 20 percent of our energy, and new designs for nuclear plants could eliminate the issue entirely.

When inadequate safety precautions combine with a severe natural disaster, like they did in the 2011 Fukushima disaster, the risks of nuclear power become evident.

Although the radiation exposure from nuclear plants can be dangerous, these risks must be placed in context. NASA concluded that nuclear power avoided an average of 76,000 deaths and 64 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide every year between 2000 and 2009 by reducing fossil fuel consumption. According to the National Academy of Sciences, the burning of fossil fuels leads to $120 billion in health costs and 20,000 premature deaths caused by air pollution each year.

In spite of all this evidence, Cuomo hopes to close Westchester's Indian Point Plant when its licenses expire in 2015. Although the federal government has the sole authority to regulate the safety of nuclear power plants, state administrations have the power to prevent the construction of new reactors and can propose referendums that force plants to close. Cuomo could also deny Entergy, the owner of Indian Point, the water it takes (and returns) to the Hudson River by rejecting its water permit.

Cuomo's misguided attempt to rid New York City of what he inaccurately views as a dangerous source of power will have immediate, perilous consequences. Blackouts will put the health and safety of millions of New Yorkers at risk, but the costs don't end there. A nuclear phase-out will increase our reliance on fossil fuels and drastically reduce our air quality. NASA predicts that this decrease in air quality will cause thousands — perhaps millions — of additional air-quality-related deaths.

In addition, research and development within the nuclear industry has produced results that, if implemented, could make nuclear an even safer, greener source of power, with less hazardous waste. If the states make it impossible for nuclear plants to survive, however, investment will sputter.

Rather than encouraging Indian Point to explore these new technologies and retrofit their outdated equipment — perhaps using the subsidy budget currently being doled out to less realistic enterprises like fuel cells and water-intensive, high cost solar energy — Cuomo is attempting to shut them out entirely.

Even the liberal New York Times editorial page recently endorsed the benefits of nuclear power over renewables in a world where the latter are still a pipe dream.

It's time for Cuomo to take facts seriously and work to help nuclear power improve our environment and our health — rather than advocating for impractical renewables while fossil fuels destroy them both.