Link Between Vaccines and Autism Discredited.

The power of the Internet has never been more evident than in the controversy over autism and childhood vaccines.

For years, a theory gaining traction with parents and advocacy groups has been that childhood vaccines preserved with thiomersal, a mercury-based derivative, were the major cause of autism. Web sites, blogs, chat rooms and high-profile public advocates, including Robert Kennedy Jr., cited the dangers of thiomersal. Inevitably, newspapers and magazines picked up the story. Reports of parents refusing vaccines for their children followed summarily.

A study just released in the journal Pediatrics analyzes insurance claims data and other records for children with autism and autism spectrum disorders (conditions resembling autism). It shows exposure to thiomersal, prenatally or after delivery, did not increase the risk of autism. This study found higher-than-average exposures to thiomersal were actually less common in children with autism than in those without the condition.

A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention researcher confirmed that the data yielded no evidence that increasing thiomersal exposure was associated with increased risk of autism or related spectrum disorders. The methodology was probably the most detailed to date. Researchers had extensive childhood immunization records and direct access for interviews of children and their mothers. Thiomersal exposure was calculated from computerized immunization records (for both children and pregnant mothers), and the mercury content of each vaccine dose was obtained from lot-specific manufacturers' records and published data.

This is the latest research, including a 2004 review by the Institute of Medicine, failing to establish a link between autism and vaccines. Earlier this year, the British medical journal Lancet, considered by many as the world's most prestigious medical journal, retracted a controversial 1998 paper linking childhood vaccines to autism. The study was discredited, and its lead author, Dr. Andrew Wakefield, was cited for unethical action. The General Medical Council, which oversees doctors in Britain, called his conduct "dishonest and irresponsible."

Demonstrating cause and effect, as in the case of vaccines and autism, is difficult. It involves establishing an agent (e.g. bacteria, drug, chemical exposure) that contributes to the development of a disease, along with proving the disease becomes less frequent when the agent is removed. Contrary to public belief, studies merely demonstrating statistical associations are not sufficient to establish causation.

There are rare occasions in medicine when genius and fortune coincide. In a legendary medical story, British anesthesiologist John Snow discovered a faulty pump supplying water to a London neighborhood caused a devastating 1854 cholera epidemic. Unfortunately, that is the exception. It often takes decades to establish cause and effect, and even today relationships such as that between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, or asbestos and mesothelioma, are incompletely understood.

As difficult as it is to prove causation, it is often just as hard to disprove causation in the public mind. Numerous studies have refuted the autism/vaccine theory, but study limitations, along with a paternalistic attitude by the medical community, failed to reassure the public. Suspicions intensified in 1999 when government scientists became concerned infants might be receiving too much mercury and as a precautionary measure, the CDC and the American Academy of Pediatrics asked pharmaceutical companies to remove thiomersal from vaccines.

The vaccine manufacturers subsequently removed the preservative from most of their products by 2001. Yet a California Department of Public Health study demonstrated the rate of autism in California has risen since 2001. This is further evidence undermining any link between vaccines and autism since the rate of autism should have decreased when vaccinated children were no longer exposed.

The question of what causes autism remains unanswered. Researchers currently believe a genetic etiology is responsible for up to 10 percent of all cases. In those genetically predisposed, exposure to unknown environmental triggers may be a cofactor. Dr. Richard Deth, an adviser to the National Autism Association, has said the final answer will come when the paper is written that says exactly what causes autism. Unfortunately, the complex nature of autism suggests that is unlikely to happen anytime soon.

Even with science suggesting thiomersal is unlikely to cause autism, some public skepticism will persist. The case for vaccines causing autism grows ever weaker but debate will continue because no single study can definitively establish, or say with absolute certainty, there is no cause and effect relationship. Some 2,500 years ago, Greek logicians explained it is impossible to "prove" a negative.

But over a long enough time period if a cause and effect did exist, eventually the weight of scientific evidence would reveal it. When that doesn't happen, then either no link exists or any conceivable link is so infinitesimally small as to be unworthy of worry. In the case of vaccines and autism, it is hard to argue that parents have reason to forgo vaccinating their children based on any plausible risk-benefit.