We Need Faith In God and Science.

The controversial disclaimer that will be read to Dover, Pa., public school students before they embark on the evolution chapters of their texts delivers the trifle that critics of evolution-as-gospel were asking for. It distinguishes Darwin's theory from proven fact and informs students that there are gaps and contradictions, allowing for the hypothesis that something other than accidents has guided the evolution process.

But evolutionists wanted a fight, so it's on.

They say that intelligent design theory is nothing more than religious faith, screaming "creationist!" at anyone who calls attention to the proven forgeries that still grace some biology texts (such as Ernst Haeckel's all-embryos-start-out-looking-the-same drawings and the dark moths that were glued onto dark trees to make the case for natural selection). 

But surely you need as much faith to believe that a fish flops out of the sea, eventually sprouts legs and ends up running away with your wife.

I remember the older kids in school telling us that in a few generations, people will be born without a fourth finger, since no one uses it. The teacher told them that the useless finger would eventually cease to form - unless you came from a line of typists or musicians, in which case your children and your children's children would retain it. Indeed, sometimes evolution smacks of the primitive Algonquin myth: This animal looks like that animal, so they must share the same lost ancestor.

It's called sloppy science. And there's only one explanation for its being the unassailable dogma at public schools: to keep even the possibility of a god out. Heaven forbid the kids derive their value from an authority higher than the state - that is, from the same power from which our Declaration of Independence derives its authority. That's something secularists don't like to be reminded of as they try to remove the word "God" from our Pledge, our courts and, one day, our currency.

If intelligent design is veiled creationism, then evolution is veiled statist atheism. Call it biodeology. For some reason, to the church-state-separatist zealots, there is nothing more daunting than the prospect of a god watching over us. A Fidel Castro or Joseph Stalin, OK, but God forbid it should be God.

Hence, when setting out to prove the existence of something mysterious, they turn to the weather. God's wrath isn't real, but the planet's is (e.g., Katrina). "Do you believe in global warming? That is a religious question," MIT meteorologist Richard Lindzen told a National Press Club audience last year. Once you're a believer, "you never have to defend this belief, except to claim that you are supported by all scientists - except for a handful of corrupted heretics."

If they're going to be religious about unknown causes, they might as well try to prove God. Science is doing just that.

"Has Science Discovered God?" asks a new video by Antony Flew, a leading atheist philosopher in England who at the age of 81 has concluded that only a super-intelligence can explain the origin of life and nature's complexity. Could it be that there's been no contradiction between God and science all along? Even the Roman Catholic Church holds that evolution and God don't conflict. After all, what is science but God's own tools that he lets us in on?

Robert Spencer's new book, "The Politically Incorrect Guide to Islam (and the Crusades)," reveals how religion has inspired science historically: "The holy book of Islam portrays Allah as absolutely sovereign and bound by nothing.

This ... precluded a key assumption that helped foster the development of science in Europe. Jews and Christians believed that God is good and that His goodness is consistent. Therefore, He created the universe according to rational laws that can be discovered, making scientific investigation worthwhile."

To Charles Darwin himself, who said gaps in the fossil record would one day undermine his theory, God's existence was never an open question. A few years ago, a less religious William Dembski, a mathematician at Baylor University in Texas, set about inventing a statistical method to detect design in biological systems, and was all but lynched by the evolution McCarthyists among his fellow faculty, who had his center shut down.

As science continues to point to a designer, one Marxist goal will be achieved: eradicating religion as we know it, since only facts will remain. In other words, God exists - but don't worry, there's a scientific explanation. In the meantime, all you atheist evolutionaries can keep laughing at us empirical believers. Heaven will still have you; you'll just feel really stupid when you get there.