Nuclear power was welcomed in Wisconsin when the first reactors went online.

When you're driving past the cornfields and cow pastures of rural Manitowoc County, you might be surprised, and a little perplexed, to suddenly find yourself crossing Nuclear Road. The Atomic Age seems far removed from this bucolic corner of America's Dairyland. If you turn east, however, Nuclear Road will take you directly to the twin reactor buildings of the Point Beach power plant, Wisconsin's oldest atomic facility.

The unfolding nuclear disaster in Japan has focused new attention on this venerable powerhouse. Point Beach has been operating in broad daylight for more than 40 years without serious incident, but fears of a catastrophe, never far below the surface, have been renewed even here in the heartland.

The history of Point Beach is essentially the story of nuclear power in America. In 1954, less than 10 years after American bombs caused Japan's first nuclear disaster, the Atomic Energy Act made the underlying technology available to private industries and public utilities.

The Wisconsin Electric Power Co., predecessor of We Energies, was quick to jump on the nuclear bandwagon. In 1952, WEPCO joined a consortium of firms that developed Fermi 1, a nuclear plant that went on line south of Detroit in 1963. Although it was ultimately a flop, Fermi 1 demonstrated that the atom could indeed by harnessed to generate electricity on a commercial scale.

Wisconsin had already experienced its first nuclear chain reaction. Allis-Chalmers, a major producer of traditional generating equipment, was experimenting with atomic power after the war, and in 1959 the company began to split atoms in a modestly scaled test reactor. It was located in Greendale, of all places, on the site that would later become the home of Reiman Publications.

There is a common misconception about the nature of nuclear power. Many of us have a vague notion that all those particles pinging around inside a reactor somehow give off enough energy to light our homes. What a chain reaction produces, however, is not electricity but massive amounts of heat. For America's utility industry, atomic power was basically a new way to boil water. It is the steam from boiling water that drives the turbines that generate electricity; everything past the reactor operates just as it does in plants fueled by coal, oil or natural gas.

In the mid-1960s, facing an economic boom and fearing that there wouldn't be enough power to sustain it, Wisconsin Electric began to weigh its options. Coal and nuclear were close in cost, but WEPCO chose nuclear for its next plant in 1965, citing "improved continuity of operation for nuclear units, and recognition of the part that nuclear energy must necessarily play in meeting the rapidly expanding energy requirements of the country."

The utility already was using Lake Michigan water in its plants at Oak Creek, St. Francis and Port Washington. After combing the shoreline all the way to Escanaba, Mich., WEPCO settled on a site just north of Two Rivers. Named Point Beach for a nearby state forest, the property lay attractively close to the utility's Fox Valley customers.

Wisconsin Electric originally had planned to install a single 454-megawatt reactor at Point Beach, but when Westinghouse, the unit's manufacturer, offered a too-low-to-say-no price on a nuclear twin, WEPCO doubled the plant's capacity. Ground was broken in late 1966, and the nation's 19th nuclear facility went into service on Dec. 21, 1970.

In sharp contrast to subsequent projects, Point Beach was greeted with open arms. Not a single opponent testified at multiple public hearings. The area's congressman called the plant "a tremendous boost," and the Two Rivers city manager said, "I can't begin to tell you how pleased we are." WEPCO officials were just as enthusiastic, describing nuclear as "the most environmentally compatible" power source and Point Beach as "a culmination of historic progress."

The new facility did, in fact, become a workhorse of the WEPCO system and one of the most reliable nuclear plants in the country. Its role became even more vital with the energy crisis of 1973-'74. The Arab oil embargo triggered sharp spikes in the price of both crude oil and coal, making the decision to build Point Beach seem positively inspired.

Other Wisconsin utilities had joined the nuclear parade by that time. In 1974, a coalition of state companies dedicated another atomic plant a few miles up the lakeshore in Kewaunee County, which soon had a Nuclear Road of its own.

The turning point.

Not everyone shared the rosy prognosis of the nuclear advocates. By the early 1970s, environmentalists were raising concerns about both runaway radiation and thermal pollution - the discharge of water at temperatures high enough to harm aquatic life. Those concerns helped to create a new regulatory climate, but nuclear power remained a viable option.

Then came Three Mile Island. In 1979, a series of malfunctions at the Pennsylvania power plant caused a partial meltdown of the reactor core and the evacuation of thousands of nearby residents. Occurring just 12 days after the premiere of "The China Syndrome," an anti-nuclear drama starring Jane Fonda, the incident fed a rising sense of panic.

Although there was no lasting damage, the nuclear near-miss at Three Mile Island had a chilling effect on America's atomic power industry. WEPCO and its partners were forced to abandon plans for a third nuclear plant on the Lake Michigan shoreline north of Sheboygan. The site they had in mind is now Whistling Straits golf course.

And so matters have stood from that day to this. Existing plants have continued to operate, but there has been a virtual moratorium on new construction. Every time nuclear power seems on the verge of a comeback, another disaster occurs, notably Chernobyl in 1986 and now Japan in 2011.

Concerns about climate change, in the meantime, have boosted demand for energy sources that don't rely on fossil fuels or emit clouds of pollutants. That would seem to include nuclear, but nothing says forever like radioactive waste. Spent fuel rods remain dangerous for centuries - well beyond any future we can see in our headlights - and the dangers posed by radiation in any form are insidious. There is a science-fiction quality to a force that you can't see, smell, touch or taste but that can kill you just as effectively as cyanide or dynamite.

On the other hand, nuclear power is highly efficient and generally unobtrusive when the plants are operated and maintained properly. If you exclude recent events in Madison, the chances of a meltdown in Wisconsin are remote. We live on what geologists call the "stable craton," a zone virtually immune to major tectonic activity, and safety requirements are stringent. The late Sol Burstein, who had charge of WEPCO's power plants, once compared the redundant nuclear safeguards at Point Beach to a man who wears a belt, puts on suspenders and then sews his pants to his shirt.

Nuclear energy is hardly alone as a problematic power source. Coal, oil and gas all pollute the air. Hydroelectric dams kill rivers. Only the most gigantic solar panels can generate meaningful power, and they're useless when the sun doesn't shine. Wind turbines kill birds, and they're useless when the wind doesn't blow. Once the novelty wears off, they can also be downright ugly. If you stand in the middle of a Fond du Lac County wind turbine "farm" after dark, the effect of their warning lights is like dozens of digital alarm clocks blinking "12:00" in unison all night long.

Looking ahead.

The point is that there is no panacea, no single perfect power source, and choosing between them is a little like picking your poison. Unless we're willing to give up our computers, our cellphones and our iPods, we're all part of the problem; electricity is the lifeblood of modern civilization.

The current emphasis on alternative fuels and renewable energy should by all means be continued but, in our insatiable appetite for power and our simultaneous urge to rein it in, Americans seem at times like alcoholics trying to limit the output of a distillery. Even if we could solve our own problems, there's a whole world out there that's hungry for energy. Global demand is going up, not down, and we can hardly blame the people of India and China for wanting what we already have.

Wisconsin consumers have been driving down Nuclear Road for more than 40 years now. Atomic energy has helped maintain our way of life for two generations. The wizards among us may someday develop new sources of base load energy. Until that day comes, nuclear power, like its byproducts, is sure to be with us for a very long time to come.