The greening of nuclear power.

To the extent the average person ponders such things, the word "nuclear" can be disagreeable, conjuring up foul thoughts of two-headed fish, "The China Syndrome" and Jackson Browne.

So, instead, let's turn to a cheery Homer Simpson, who once thanked the Lord "for nuclear power, the cleanest, safest energy source there is. Except for solar, which is just a pipe dream."

Homer, as usual, has stumbled onto a vital point. Nuclear energy is the cleanest, most cost-effective large-scale "alternative" energy available. Proponents contend that a significant increase in nuclear power could alleviate higher energy prices, and help chip away at many concerns of environmentalists — ironically, the same group most stridently opposed to nuclear energy. Fortunately, attitudes are changing.

At this point, the public is spoon fed hyped-up quixotic solutions — ethanol, solar, wind-generated power — that are economically unfeasible and environmentally inconsequential in the short-term. "Energy independence" might be an effective applause line during a presidential debate, but in reality it's nothing more than platitude-infused wishful thinking.

The new federal energy bill, for instance, requires the United States to produce 36 billion gallons of biofuels yearly by 2022. As Robert Bryce, author of the forthcoming book "Gusher of Lies: The Dangerous Delusions of Energy Independence," points out: "That sounds like a lot of fuel, but put it in perspective: The United States uses more than 320 billion gallons of oil per year, of which nearly 200 billion gallons are imported." That number is likely to grow. So even if we hit all the right notes, "energy independence" — whatever that means, exactly — is a long way off.

Yet a new nuclear reactor hasn't gone on-line in the United States in more than 20 years. France operates 59 nuclear reactors, which supply 78 percent of that nation's electric energy needs. (No wonder those guys embrace carbon trading pyramid schemes.) England has just unveiled plans for a new generation of nuclear power plants. Countries from Japan to Thailand are also turning to more nuclear power. Even China — where officials worry about carbon footprints at roughly the same level they do human rights — will build 32 new nuclear plants by 2020 and an estimated 300 more by 2050.

Dr. Patrick Moore, one of the founders of well-known environmentalist group Greenpeace, was once a critic of nuclear power. He now believes that the impact of popular culture and unfounded fears have led to a multitude of misconceptions. "The fact that nuclear technology was first used to make the bomb had a deep psychological impact on the mass mind," he explains. "Even though I was doing a Ph.D. in science at the time I helped found Greenpeace, I made the same mistake, lumping nuclear energy in with nuclear weapons, when one is destructive and the other beneficial."

Moore goes on to say that fear is a common public reaction to issues like apocalyptic climate change, genetic modification and chemicals. Or, more specifically, fear of the invisible. "COb, DNA, radiation, and 'parts per billion' are all invisible," he says. "It is fairly easy to make up a story about invisible things because people can't see for themselves. Nuclear energy is by far the safest of the major energy technologies."

Another convert to nuclear energy is author Gwyneth Cravens, whose new book, "Power to Save the World: The Truth About Nuclear Energy," began as a pessimistic investigation into nuclear power's dubious future and ended as an ode to the wonders of nuclear fission. Cravens, who says her book is "fundamentally about prejudice based on wrong information," spent 10 years reporting from national laboratories, uranium mines and nuclear waste sites. She claims, among other things:

• Nuclear power emits no gases and burns nothing.

• Toxic waste from coal-fired plants kills thousands of Americans annually, but 50 years of nuclear operation have not caused a single death among the public in this country. 

• Uranium, when used as energy, is so dense that if "you got all of your electricity for your lifetime solely from nuclear power, your share of the waste would fit in a single soda can."

• Annual waste from a typical nuclear reactor could fit in the bed of a pickup truck and 50 years of waste from all the reactors in the country would fit in a single football field.

• "A person living within 50 miles of a nuclear plant receives less radiation from it in a year than you get from eating one banana."

Proponents of nuclear energy also say that reactors currently operating in the United States prevent emissions of 682 million tons of carbon dioxide every year. As Moore recently explained, the "104 nuclear plants that are operating across the United States are the equivalent of taking 100 million cars off the road." Nuclear energy, in other words, blows away any other alternative source of energy as viable and environmentally friendly.

Now, for those less concerned about the environment and more worried about our habit of obtaining oil from countries ruled by religious radicals, dictators and Norwegians, uranium can be found in the United States — as well as other semi-civilized places like Australia and Canada.

So what are we waiting for?

Oh yeah, there's that Chernobyl thing. And Three Mile Island. Chernobyl, of course, is the result of a glorious Third World socialist energy policy. Studies showed that Chernobyl's design was terribly unsound. Many experts also believe in the "flawed operators theory" which means that operators blew the place up by accident. New reactors everywhere in the world are remarkably safer. Last year, for instance, after a massive earthquake near one of the world's largest power plants in Kashiwazaki-Kariwa, Japan, the place was hardly worse for wear.

Three Mile Island, Moore contends, was a success story: "The concrete containment structure did just what it was designed to do: prevent radiation from escaping into the environment. And although the reactor itself was crippled, there was no injury or death among nuclear workers or nearby residents."

Three Mile Island, in fact, is the only serious accident in the history of nuclear energy in this country. No one died. Yet, every year, hundreds perish in accidents working with other energy sources. Moreover, a single, relatively isolated accident should not scare a nation, literally, senseless.

Fortunately, there may be an attitude adjustment in the works. Recently, the report on global warming from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change endorsed — albeit tepidly — nuclear power.

The Department of Energy deadline for nuclear plants seeking federal approval before the end of 2008 is coming. Those approved will be provided with tax credits of up to $125 million for eight years and loan guarantees for up to 80 percent of a plant's cost.

Moore believes that his position will win out because it is "based on science and logic." Moore also cites other well-known environmental thinkers like James Lovelock, Stuart Brand, Jared Diamond and Tim Flannery, who have on some level advocated for nuclear energy as a prudent environmental choice.

Nuclear energy without question is in the midst of a worldwide boom. As the only true wide-scale alternative to fossil fuel, that's no surprise. Now, if only we can get those grousing end-of-worlders to endorse an energy policy that actually can change our situation, we'll all be on the right road.