My Word: Keep nuclear plant closed.

Earlier this year, we learned the Crystal River nuclear plant was to be closed indefinitely because of a new crack found in the containment dome. In the wake of the Fukushima disaster in Japan, this is yet another reminder that nuclear power is inherently dangerous and expensive.

Four months after the earthquake, tsunami and subsequent meltdown of three nuclear reactors, Tokyo Electric Power Co., the nuclear corporation that owns the Fukushima plant, is no closer to controlling the meltdowns or securing 20 years of radioactive material at risk in the waste pool.

Tens of thousands of Japanese people living near the reactors have evacuated because of the disaster, and trace amounts of radioactive substances have been found in people living as far away as about 30 miles from the reactor. As a result, the Japanese government has announced that it wants to shift away from nuclear power toward a renewable-energy future.

In Florida, after stating that the plant near Crystal River might be closed permanently, its owner, Progress Energy, has declared that its initial plans are to repair the plant, but it will not come back online until 2014. Progress Energy should scrap this proposal and do the right thing by closing the nuclear plant for good.

More than 1 million people live within a 50-mile radius of the plant, which has been closed for almost two years while Progress Energy tried unsuccessfully to fix the crack. The utility has spent $440 million on replacement power and repairs during this time period, $112 million of which is being passed on to ratepayers this year. Consumers could pay as much as $560 million of the $2 billion cost of repairs and alternative energy. Meanwhile, the utility plans to build two new reactors in Florida that could cost up to $23 billion, which ratepayers are already paying for as part of their monthly bills.

Across the state, we should phase out dirty power sources like nuclear and coal that threaten our health and safety. Instead, we should be investing in safe solutions like clean, renewable energy and energy efficiency. New nuclear reactors don't make economic sense, and Florida ratepayers shouldn't be stuck footing the bill for inevitable cost overruns and expensive repairs.

As the Sunshine State, Florida is uniquely situated to lead the nation in developing clean, renewable energy like solar power. To continue to throw ratepayer dollars at outdated, dangerous power sources when better options are available would be irresponsible.

The Crystal River plant should be closed for good. It is time for Florida and the nation to move away from dangerous nuclear power and fossil fuels and toward safe, clean, renewable energy.