Let us know if our food is genetically engineered.

While it’s true that genetically engineered ingredients have been present in the foods Americans have eaten for years — since the early 1990s, in fact — to compare the process to selective breeding is incorrect and just what the biotechnology corporations want consumers to believe.

Genetic engineering is a process that cannot occur by itself in nature, it is always done in a laboratory, it is not necessarily a precise procedure and, most important, it combines genes of different species. The author of the article “Genetically modified foods: What they are and a look at the debate” (nj.com, May 13) compares breeding a docile dog with the process of genetic engineering (aka GMOs, or genetically modified organisms); however, nothing could be further off-base. A cock-a-poo, for example, is bred from a poodle and a cocker spaniel, two like species. When a plant is genetically engineered in a lab, it is usually with the genes from another species altogether, often with the vehicle for the genetic modification being a virus or bacteria used to “infect” the plant. It’s clearly not the same thing at all.

There are many foods besides the usual culprits (soy, cotton, canola, corn, sugar beets) that consumers need to be aware of when it comes to GMOs. Here are some examples:

Sweet corn. Originally, most genetically engineered corn was used for animal feed. Since 2011, however, roughly 40 percent of the sweet corn planted in the U.S. is genetically engineered, a very quiet but marked increase. This includes the corn we might find at supermarkets, farmers markets and farm stands. If it isn’t organic or labeled GMO-free, be aware that it may very well be a GMO.

Meat, chicken and fish. While it’s true that there aren’t any genetically engineered meats or fish on the market, if you aren’t eating 100 percent grass-fed (beware of grain-finished) or 100 percent organic meat, you’re likely eating GMOs. This is because the animals themselves eat GMO feed. And what the animals eat is passed along the food chain.

Dairy products. Bovine growth hormone, or rBGH, can still be found in many dairy products such as ice cream, cheese and butter, unless the package is clearly marked “No rBGH.” This, too, is a genetically modified product.

Food allergies occur when the body has a reaction to a novel protein, one that it doesn’t recognize. Did you know that 89 percent of genetically modified soy in the U.S. contains foreign genes from bacteria and petunias? With the incidence of food allergies skyrocketing — coincidentally since around the time GMOs started to appear in our food supply — one would think the FDA would step up to the plate to review its policies.

At the very least, Americans deserve long-term testing and research to know that the food they eat is safe.

The FDA has its own, outdated, agenda when it comes to GMOs. It relies on the term “GRAS” — or Generally Regarded As Safe — and in the case of GMOs, the FDA relies on research supplied by biotech companies to verify the safety of their own products. The FDA has maintained this stance since 1992.

A large and increasingly vocal portion of the country believes genetically engineered foods need to be labeled as such. In the interim, the pro-active “Non-GMO” label has sprung up and it is thriving. With 66 percent growth in 2012, it is the fastest-growing label in the natural food sector, with no signs of abating.

While a mere two years ago GMOs were but a whisper, now we can hear about the issue loud and clear. The challenge is getting the information out there to the public. In the meanwhile, statewide initiatives to label foods as containing GMOs here in New Jersey and in more than half the states in the U.S. are moving forward and their proponents will not stop until the job is done.