Give Intelligent Design Equal Time and Place.

Why is it OK to teach evolution in public schools, and not intelligent design?

I just don't get it. Both are theories that would take a person older than time to confirm. Both raise more questions than answers. And both, if we really want to be honest, require some level of faith. For creationists, it's faith in the existence of a higher being. For evolutionists, it's faith in assumptions that would take millions of years to disprove. And who has the time?

Yet, here we go again opting to teach one theory to children as the gospel truth, and banning the other from schools.

This time, Florida wants to revamp the state's science curriculum to replace the word "evolution" for "biological changes over time." As expected, the proposed change set off a firestorm among those who consider "evolution" a loaded word. The state Board of Education will vote on the issue Feb. 14.

Evolution, of course, is the theory that life began spontaneously with a single-cell organism that evolved over time. Proponents of intelligent design argue that life is so complex it had to be created by a higher being. I, for one, have no problem with the "e" word becoming a part of the curriculum. Evolution by any other name is still evolution. If you're teaching it to my children, then I want to know about it. Don't disguise it. Don't dress it up. Just give it to me straight so I can de-program the kids when they get home. It's just part of living in a society where people are free to have different views, points of view, and I accept that.

But it goes both ways. Proponents of evolution have to realize that Not everyone is convinced the theory is true. And those who don't are also taxpayers who should have a say in the curriculum. If evolution is allowed in the classroom, intelligent design should be too. It's only fair, since Gallup polls have found that the majority of Americans believe life began with a supreme being anyway.

But that will never happen, because the debate has never been about fairness, but about "censorship," a term used by some libertarians when it comes to anything that religious people want banned, but is never associated with attempts to keep the mere mention of "God" out of schools.

Evolution proponents argue their theory is a proven science, and intelligent design is not. Yet, there are many scientists who would disagree. In a book, titled In Six Days: Why Fifty Scientists Choose to Believe in Creation, experts from several disciplines use scientific research to make their arguments. They challenge, for example, the notion that the Earth is millions of years old, using the laws of thermodynamics and other scientific standards.

"The age of the Earth can neither be proved nor disproved by science," wrote Dr. Jeremy I. Walter, head of the Engineering Analysis and Design Department at Pennsylvania State University. "Scientific evidence can be compiled to support one model of Earth history as compared to another, but such work amounts to a feasibility study, not proof."

As for the theory of evolution: and member of the national board of directors of the Health Physics Society Andrew McIntosh, a combustion theory expert at the University of Leeds in the United Kingdom, bases his argument on the second law of thermodynamics, which establishes that a spontaneous, natural process could only lead to increased chaos and less complexity over time. The theory seems to contradict evolution, which asserts that the universe has become more orderly and complex.

I'm not a scientist, but such arguments raise enough questions to at least warrant a debate. The book also includes articles by geologists, zoologists, biologists, botanists, physicists, chemists, mathematicians and medical researchers, many of them at the top of their fields. But you'll never hear those scientists quoted in a public classroom. They might provoke thought, and we don't want that to happen in school.

The heated debate between evolutionists and creationists could be easily toned down with just a little common sense and tolerance. Instead we're faced with an uproar every time the issue emerges - everybody trying to get their theory in the public schools to the exclusion of the other. In a private school, favoring one theory over the other is fine. But in public schools funded by people of opposing views, children should be exposed to both sides.

If they are persuaded by one argument, then so be it. But It's not fair to deprive them of their right to choose.
