Making A Case For Id And Evolution In Classrooms.

I tiptoe cautiously into the intelligent design debate, lest I be mistaken for a right-wing fanatic.

That seems to be the automatic assumption made about anyone who hasn't accepted Charles Darwin as God.

If you're not for evolution you're empirically challenged, a science misfit or a creature that has not yet evolved.

It doesn't matter if you're a student or a scientist, if you're not for Darwin, you might as well be brain dead.

But according to the most recent Gallup poll on the issue, a majority of Americans believe the world was created by a higher being, as intelligent design suggests.

So I have to ask: Why all the fuss about bringing it into public schools?

I happen to believe in creation. There. I've said it.

But I'm also opposed to religion in public schools. I don't even want the schools teaching my children about Santa Claus or the Tooth Fairy. Let me tell them whether they're real or fake.

But as long as the schools are teaching about the origin of life, they're already in the religion arena, since most people think life began with a Supreme Being.

Next month, Broward County teachers will choose between two new science textbooks. One book toned down Darwin's impact on biology due to the prodding of Christian conservatives. The other includes a few paragraphs about intelligent design, which argues life is so complex that it must have been fashioned by a higher being.

Critics say they don't want intelligent design in schools because it's based on faith, not science. So publishers of the second book, Biology: The Dynamics of Life, have offered to remove the page containing the passages. And Superintendent Frank Till has said he would cut the page to eliminate the controversy if teachers pick the book.

But does anyone seriously think this flap is going away?

If it does, it will only be after all the theories are put on the table, allowing the fittest to survive, a process that Darwin called natural selection.

Will it be evolution or creation? I don't know. But it looks like creation is already in the lead.

According to the Gallup national poll taken in September, 53 percent of the of the 1,005 people sampled said God created humans in their present form the way the Bible describes it. Twelve percent endorsed the strict evolutionary perspective and 31 percent chose a modified perspective, believing human beings evolved from other species, but God guided the process. Four percent had another opinion or none at all. The margin of error was plus or minus 3 percent.

The majority of Americans also believed that both evolution and creation should be taught in science classes, according to the survey. So why do we still have such strong opposition to teaching both theories in public schools?

The science community, which rejects creation as junk science, argues the statistics reflect the fact that most Americans don't understand evolution. And that might be true. Broward School Board member Stephanie Kraft recently admitted she doesn't fully comprehend the theory, and she was widely ridiculed -- as if the rest of us really understand it.