Thank You For Not Eating Frankensteak.

I eat steak. I eat pork. Nothing is more enjoyable to my family than grilling meat on our gas grill out on our deck on a clear summer evening. I grew up on an Angus farm in Oklahoma. I was president of our school's Future Farmers of America chapter. I raised steers and won ribbons showing hogs at the county fair.

So why am I starting to listen to suggestions that maybe it is time that we stop eating our fellow mammals?

We've always known beef and pork are not great for our health, but now we may have even more reason to consider not eating beef and pork — genetic engineering. According to an article in the New York Times, a number of countries are considering creation of genetically engineered cattle, presumably to provide us with steers bulging with filet mignons.

The FDA doesn't allow genetically engineered beef or pigs in this county yet, but they may be working their way in that direction. They currently allow genetically engineered mice for research reasons. And they allowed a goat to be genetically engineered to produce a medicine ingredient in its milk. But not meat that we eat.

However, lots of vegetables that we eat are genetically modified to be grown bigger and cheaper. How long can the FDA withstand pressure to allow some modifications to beef and pork? Especially when foreign countries with which we compete start having some success.

Once it starts, where will it end? After the juicier steaks, why not make beef with potatoes built-in? Or beef that already comes with barbeque flavoring? What could go wrong? They could merge it with a chicken to get either lean beef that you can raise for chicken feed, or a four-legged chicken that gives milk and would hold its own in a bull fight.

Australia is already creating genetically engineered dairy cattle. Last time I checked, milk was cheaper than gasoline. So unless someone is working on a car that runs on milk, I don't think we're going to need cows whose udders are so large that they look as if they are doing pilates.

I don't have a problem eating chicken or fish. They evolved from ferocious dinosaurs and sharks that consumed and chased our ancestors into the trees. Turnabout and all that. But cows and pigs are so docile, so trusting, so cute. Let's not turn them into Cowzilla for our own culinary delight.

For now, I plan to keep eating beef and pork. But if I wake up someday and find that the industry has created genetically engineered cattle that contain DNA from watermelons just to give me a bigger juicier steak, or pigs that fly due to a DNA enhancement designed to convince me they really are the other white meat, then I am ready to foreswear beef and pork from that day forward.

But for now, I'm just tapering off.