Dr. Rima Replies: Scientist and Celebrities Agree, Vaccines Kill! 

There has been a lot of discussion about why celebrities should not be taken seriously when they say they distrust/fear vaccines because they are not scientists or physicians. Well, I am a scientist and a physician and therefore, by this logic, should be taken seriously when I say that I am an Anti Vaxxer and proud of it.

In fact, once you understand what is science and what is pseudoscience in the magical mystery tour which is vaccine propaganda, you will become a proud Anti Vaxxer right along with me.

Let’s start with the fact that in science, as opposed to, say, politics or religion, the answer must make sense. And injecting known toxins like mercury, aluminum, formaldehyde and foreign protein (including stealth viruses like the SV40 virus which causes leukemia and which the CDC has publicly acknowledged they knew was contaminating the polio vaccines that 98 million American’s received) and other dangerous compounds into humans simply does not make sense.

If you trust the government to regulate industries like the pharmaceutical and vaccine industry, then you must be comfortable with the following facts:

1. Regulators move from industry to the FDA and CDC, etc., on a revolving door basis and back again. They make lots ad lots of money in their industry positions and the take government positions at a lot less money where they show their loyalty to their corporate buds and are rewarded with even higher paying jobs

2. There is no such thing as a conflict of interest in their world. Someone like Dr. Paul Offit (rhymes with profit) can hold the patent for a vaccine and then sit on the panel that approves it, garnering himself at least $25 million (a very conservative estimate) the next year alone and bringing the vaccinated children serious pneumonia and meningitis complications.

3. Vaccination is so risky that no insurer in the world will provide insurance coverage. To deal with this problem, the FDA and the US Congress have exempted the vaccine manufacturers from ANY financial liability for any damage their products cause, regardless of its severity or how clear a vaccine adverse event it is.Instead, every antigen is taxed – in a tax paid by the recipient or parent – to fund the Special Masters Vaccine Court which has already paid out more than $2 Billion to compensate victims of vaccine injury.

4. Every infectious disease for which a vaccine has been introduced was in decline BEFORE the introduction of the vaccine because of the generalized availability of clean water, clean and more nutritious food, better general hygiene and living conditions. Most infectious diseases showed a meaningful increase in incidence AFTER the vaccine was introduced.

5. Every vaccine in the US must, under US law, be tested both for safety and efficacy. No vaccine has ever been evaluated for either. If studies are done, the placebo is invariably a toxic substance (often mercury itself or another known high-toxicity vaccine like the rabies vaccine). In the ONLY methodologically meaningful placebo controlled double blind study EVER conducted on a vaccine (a current flu vaccine), the level of protection did not reach statistical significance (meaning it was accounted for by chance) but those who received the vaccine had nearly 5 times the incidence of serious pulmonary infections (pneumonia).

6. There is no possibility of a genetic trend asserting itself in less than 45 years. When I graduated from medical school in 1970, autism occurred 1 time in 10,000 children, world wide. The latest figures are horrifying: 1 Somalian child in 36 in Minneapolis is autistic while CDC tells us that 1 child in 68 in the general population is autistic and, no, the criteria are pretty much the same. Since vaccines are what have changed, not genes, the CDC muddied the water on March 28th of this year by saying “US data shows autism rates up 30%, but condition not necessarily ‘more common’”. Still trusting that ol’ gubb’ment o’ yours?

7. Vaccines do not prevent disease. To “prove” that vaccines generate antibodies in the people who receive them (which is inaccurately believed to be the same as the development of immunity) Merck fraudulently added canine antibodies to “beef up” the antibody count to blood supposedly taken from humans who had received the mumps vaccine. Aluminum and squalene, both highly dangerous substances when in your bloodstream, are added to vaccines to increase the number of antibodies produced although they add nothing to immunity and vaccine antibody count does not equate to enhanced immunity.

In fact, immunity is damaged, decreased and diminished by the injection of these immune irritants (“adjuvants”) resulting in high increases of chronic degenerative disorders, just as we see wherever vaccine rates rise. The statistics are abundantly clear.

As a scientist, I could go on and on and on. It would be wonderful if we could dismiss the reality of vast and deadly cover up collisions between indemnified manufacturers and industry regulators. Tragically, we have endless documentation on this collusion from Simpsonwood, FOIA documents and the real data behind the cooked books of “scientific” studies showing that vaccines do not work, do cause damage and are, in essence, probably the largest scam in the history of science or pseudoscience.

So, there you go: I am not a celebrity. I am a doctor and scientist and I am a proud and enthusiastic Anti-Vaxxer!
