Nuclear power is still safe. Japan has only proved how safe.

The media brouhaha and hyperventilation about nuclear power is typical of the corporate news. They feed on fear and ignorance, just like any evil.

Nobody had died. NOBODY. There has been no real nuclear disaster. What there has been is a nuclear incident. That’s not the same thing. The status of incident applies to an event that is damaging, but not fatal. Repairs will be made. Containment, cooling, and backup systems will be improved to ensure that similar events don’t cause another incident. Why? Insurance. Nuclear power plants are INSURED.

NO Power plant, nuclear or otherwise, can operate without permits.

Thus, inspections, insurance, and regulation regulation regulation. If an engineer drops a wrench, that’s an incident, it gets reported, and the insurance rates might go up a bit. People get dismissed over such things.

A. The power plant is down. That means lost revenue. Even if you believe nothing else, I’m sure you can understand that the operators of this plant are losing money, and they don’t like to lose money.

B. The reputation of the industry is under such scrutiny, that any event, or incident, no matter how trivial, always results in lawsuits. Lawsuits are what now? Expensive. That’s more lost money.

C. After all previous events, Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Hanford, et al, power plants world-wide were turned down, inspected, and had to be recertified to meet newer standards. Retaining walls are thickened. Shielding is increased. Better pumps installed. Whatever is perceived as a need, is done. It remains the safest source of power ever devised.

No, I don’t work for any power facility. I’m licensed to supervise and operate a water treatment facility, which is a very different field. I’m also a scientist, as I like to point out when I want to either ruffle feathers or smooth some furrowed brows. Science is firmly behind nuclear power, and without science it could not exist.

Did you know that Three Mile Island still operates and produces power? Its license was renewed in 2004. Only part of the facility was found to be damaged and not repairable. That part of the facility has been carefully disassembled and removed. Check Google maps if you don’t believe me. It’s still operating.

Nuclear power is not a boogey man. It’s not going to poison the world. The people who are against nuclear power are the same people who want everyone else to ride bikes while they drive to their communal farm. Nothing against communal farms or bikes, mind you, but you get the point. That’s a personal attack, but deserved. Nuclear power foes are, sadly, and largely, idiots.

1. They don’t know how it works.

2. They exaggerate the dangers.

3. They exponentially exaggerate the costs.

4. They claim damages where there is little or no damage.

5. They refuse to see that nothing is or can be perfect, and can’t accept reality.

6. These people don’t live without power. If you aren’t willing to turn off your power meter, don’t go to a power protest!

I admire and accept the views of people who choose to live in earth huts, and have no electricity by design. I’m impressed by Quakers, and some Mormons who also choose to live off the grid. That’s a noble and valid sacrifice, but that’s all it is. A sacrifice that they choose to make. Most other people want to continue using power.

Your beliefs are not equal to science. They rarely will be, and in my experiences, almost never are.

You have a right to an opinion. You do not have the right to force obedience to your opinion upon me, or anyone else. This is what the anti-nuclear crowd wants. They have a political agenda based on a pseudo-religious belief that nuclear is bad, and solar is good. News flash, there isn’t enough solar power generation on the entire planet to run a single modern city. Wind and Ocean power, even less. Hydro and other power like geothermal, too limited in scope and development. Until something better comes along, and all sciences are constantly under refinement, we will continue to need nuclear power.

Eventually, we will figure out total conversion, fusion, or some other thing that provides a cleaner, more readily available power source. When that happens you can expect the nations of the Earth to leap on it. Of course we all want that! Claiming that scientists or politicians or corporations have any great love of nuclear power is insane, and a baseless claim at that. There’s no evidence that all players haven’t investigated, and used, other alternatives where possible.

If you succeed in stopping nuclear power, only one thing will happen as a result. Your bills will double, then quadrupal, within a few years.

There’s really no limit to how much the price of power may go up if people actually stop nuclear power. Cry all you want about the environment, about what’s right, and about waste, but the reality is that the voters hate price increases more than anything. Nobody likes to start paying twice for anything. Until humanity changes, or until a new technology becomes commercially viable, you are stuck with nuclear power.

What about the waste? What of it? It’s a tiny argument. There are many ways to deal with it, not the least of which is launching it into the sun, or storing it until we can use it in fusion power plants. Yes, it could become a very valuable fuel for early fusion designs, or some other design. Just because you don’t want it NOW, doesn’t mean it’ll always be bad. Worst case is we store it for ten million years until it’s inert. There’s ample room on the Earth, but even if that were to change, there’s ample room on the Moon.

Crazies, naysayers, vigilantes, activists, and simple fools all rail against nuclear waste. Sure, if you touch it, you’re dead. Same goes for molten lead, liquid cyanide, and many other things that we still manage to keep and use all around the planet. Yes, it’s dangerous for a long time, but so is stupidity, and we have no end of that resource.