Running down evolution without fact, without reason.

A recent letter (J&C, Aug. 2) mischaracterized the statement barring intelligent design from science classes at Ball State made by President Jo Ann Gora. The letter went on to state mistruths about current biological knowledge.

Gora did not conclude because of her reasoning that intelligent design was a religion. In Kitzmiller et al. v. Dover, U.S. District Court Judge John E. Jones III ruled, "Intelligent Design cannot uncouple itself from its creationist, and thus religious, antecedents"... "is not science and cannot be adjudged a valid, accepted scientific theory as it has failed to publish in peer-reviewed journals, engage in research and testing, and gain acceptance in the scientific community."

The theory of evolution is central to biology because this theory fits the experimental evidence. A crucial piece of evidence comes from DNA data of contemporary bacteria, archea and eukaryotes showing that all life arose from a common ancestor. This kind of DNA evidence is exactly the same that the criminal justice system uses to adjudicate guilt and innocence. Currently, law enforcement official consider DNA evidence superior to eyewitness testimony. In the case of evolution theory, the observations with fossils, radio-isotopes, genetics, genomics, developmental biology and physiology support and extend the DNA evidence, just as fingerprints and forensic analysis support and extend criminal DNA analysis.

Evolution of all species, including Homo sapiens, is constantly occurring and studied. Frequently, the theory of evolution enlightens us about the causes and consequences of important biological problems. One example is the rise of antibiotic-resistant, disease-causing bacteria. The widespread use of antibiotics in agriculture creates a natural selection for the resistant bacteria. Microbiologists can study the genetic mechanisms (plasmids and transposons) causing the evolution of antibiotic-resistant genes and population geneticists can follow the distribution of bacteria containing these genes from farm animals to humans. Using this information, evolutionary theory can predict what steps are necessary to preserve the medical use of antibiotics.

Finally, the theory of evolution was not designed to or claimed to explain the origin of the universe or the origin of life, but to explain the observation that all the current living organisms (on Earth, at least) had a common ancestor 3.8 billion years ago.