What Darwin Got Wrong.

Why does the 19th-century British naturalist Charles Darwin still matter so much today? Because his understanding of nature is central to modern biotechnology, new medical therapies and industrialized agriculture. The proof of evolution by natural selection today is less in the scientific papers than in the grit-and-finance world of industry: Evolution is an idea with legs.

To say that Darwin did not discover evolution in 1859 is a vast understatement. He was only one of many, many thinkers over the previous century who drew on the idea of evolution — of biological change over time — to explain a stunning natural world that seemed to have purpose, order and a clockwork logic. His own grandfather (whom he never knew) had developed a theory of evolution, as had someone who published when Darwin was a toddler, the great French naturalist Jean Baptiste de Lamarck.

The young Charles Darwin as a student was utterly persuaded and charmed by the Rev. William Paley’s beguiling Natural Theology. This book elaborated on the popular idea that the complexity and interdependence of organic life revealed the mind of God, rather than any evolutionary process. Paley proposed that the decorative beauties of birds and flowers, the tight dance of predator and prey such that both could survive, and the intriguing variations in limbs for climbing, swimming, flying, or running were the product of divine thought. They were clever and orderly. Therefore, there had to be someone who had made them. Just as a watch led one to presume the existence of a watchmaker, so, too, did the beauties and complexity of nature lead to a presumption of the existence of God.

Eventually, of course, Darwin came to embrace a rather different explanation. In an adventure his father thought almost scandalous (and likely to ruin his social standing), he spent five years aboard the HMS Beagle, collecting and studying life along the coast of South America. Because of what he saw on this trip, he concluded that organic life was the result of a very long historical process in which most organisms ever born did not survive. Evolution by natural selection, which he first presented to the scientific community in the summer of 1858, is a story of brutal competition.

It describes population change grounded in the ruthless, repetitive elimination, by chance, predators or disease, of the unlucky, the weak, the sick, the old, the very young. It is not particularly ennobling or progressive.

As his theory stirred up a hornet’s nest of philosophical, religious and scientific critique, Darwin struggled to answer his detractors. He could not describe how heredity worked — he did not know. And he lacked all the modern tools of quantitative population genetics and molecular genomics. He had never heard of DNA, knew nothing of chromosomes, and was not quantitatively skilled or oriented. It did not occur to him to count peas (to count anything!) and he had never read Mendel.

Some of his later thinking was muddled as he tried to make up for the gaps in his own understanding. He proposed fanciful mechanisms of heredity, including floating gemmules which moved around the body collecting data. He tried to explain the evolution of behavior through an analysis of facial expression that jumbled together animals and man and flattened distinctions between various emotional states. He produced an account of sexual selection and female choice that granted extraordinary thinking skills and feelings to female lizards and peahens.

Darwin was not always right. But his core insight, elaborated across much of his writing, has stood the test of time and commerce.

Today, evolution by natural selection is known incontrovertibly to explain the natural world. Every kind of evidence we have — from populations, genes, proteins, mitochondria, laboratory breeding experiments, computational biology, genomics, everything — demonstrates that evolution by natural selection is true, accurate, correct. It is the organizing principle of modern biology, and nothing in the biological world makes sense without it. Biotechnology corporations would not be able to develop profitable products without an understanding of evolution; biomedical research assumes it in explanations of human health; environmental sciences draw on it; neuroscientists study brains across species in ways that validate its accuracy.

All modern life sciences are evolutionary sciences. Refusing to teach it to schoolchildren is like refusing to tell them about gravity. Whether they know the details of evolution or not, they are inside a natural and economic world utterly shaped by it.