Autism Rates Continue To Rise.

A host of environmental issues including diet, vaccines and overuse of antibiotics are raising the rate of autism.

A government survey of parents says 1 in 50 US schoolchildren has autism. This study came from testimonies from parents, opining that their child has some form of autism. However, health officials say the survey results do not mean autism is occurring more often.

What made more parents respond positively about their children having autism? 

Autism usually means that kids have language challenges, intellectual and social impairments and unusual, repetitious behaviors. But the definition has gradually expanded and now includes milder, related conditions.

The new estimate released Wednesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would mean at least one million children have some form of autism.

The study looked at children ages 6 to 17 and asked 100,000 parents across the nation if their child had been diagnosed on the autism spectrum.

The rise of autism cannot be genetic. If one out 50 kids has autism, there must be an environmental factor driving these rates higher. 

What is the difference between the kids today and those born 50 years ago? 

Look at diet. The diets of children today are far different than those decades ago. The invention of genetically modified foods adds to the food problem as does hydrogenated oils, the sugar-laced foods, the sport and energy drinks. Foods created today were not present in previous generations.

Look at vaccines. The average child in 1980 received eight shots before age 8 and never more than two shots per visit. In 2012, a child will receive 49 doses of 14 vaccines by the age of 6. 

Look at the overuse of antibiotics. Antibiotics that have been overly prescribed create abnormal gut terrain. As further evidence, more and powerful antibiotic-resistant bacteria are being reported.

These and more environmental factors assault the body’s nervous, immune and hormonal systems like never before in the history of this country.

Autism affects information processing in the brain by altering how nerve cells and their synapses connect and organize. It is a condition of the main systems of the body going wrong. If nothing changes, the autism rates will continue climbing. 