Opinion: Nuclear energy and women in science make the world a better place.

This year marks an anniversary of special significance for people everywhere who understand the overarching importance of nuclear energy in medicine and the world’s economic and environmental well-being. 

Seventy-five years ago, nuclear fission was discovered — a monumental achievement that led to the splitting of the atom and the development of nuclear energy. The discovery in 1938 — and the turbulent events surrounding it — offer some important lessons. One is to acknowledge, as the scientific community has done, that much of the credit for the discovery should have gone to a Viennese woman physicist named Lise Meitner who gave the first theoretical explanation of the fission process.

Meitner and Otto Hahn, a German chemist, were longtime associates in Berlin’s Kaiser Wilhelm Institute. Together and independently, they achieved important results in the new field of nuclear physics. But, for many years, German universities and those in other European countries were almost universally closed to women, and especially so in the sciences.

Being of Jewish origin, Meitner fled Nazi Germany for Stockholm in 1938 and later moved to Cambridge, England. Despite her key role in the discovery of nuclear fission, Meitner did not share in the Nobel Prize that Hahn received in 1945. Many historians believe the prize should have gone to Meitner. The Nobel “mistake” was partly rectified in 1966, when Hahn, Meitner and Fritz Strassmann, another associate at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, were awarded the U.S. Fermi Prize. In the late 1990s, element 109 was named Meitnerium in her honor.

The discovery of nuclear fission was the foundation that led to the widespread use of nuclear energy in industry and medicine. Aside from the extraordinary changes it has brought to modern life, what distinguishes nuclear energy, what astonished its early pioneers and what claims our attention today is its ability to generate an enormous amount of energy from a small amount of uranium fuel. Importantly, this energy is carbon-free and doesn’t pollute.

Today, there are grounds for optimism about the future of nuclear energy. The United States has the largest number of nuclear power plants, with approximately 100 reactors supplying one-fifth of the nation’s electricity. Worldwide, at least 30 countries rely on nuclear energy to supply at least one-quarter of their total electricity, and many others — including Turkey, Colombia, Vietnam and the United Arab Emirates — plan to build their first reactors. Seventy-one reactors are under construction, and more than 450 are planned or proposed, in addition to the 437 nuclear plants now in operation.

Nuclear energy’s continuing value exceeds electricity generation. Nuclear technology has improved people’s lives in many ways, ranging from eradicating insect pests to smoke detectors. Aircraft manufacturers use radioactive materials to check for flaws in jet engines, and pipeline companies use those materials to detect leaks in pipelines. Nuclear energy is essential to modern medicine, industry, agriculture, scientific research and space missions.

Radioisotopes have become indispensable to medicine, playing an essential role today in the diagnosis and treatment of disease, especially cancer and heart ailments. Every year, millions of Americans — including one of every three hospital patients — benefits from the use of radiation or radioactive materials in his or her medical treatments.

Attitudes toward women in science have improved considerably since the time Meitner was conducting nuclear physics experiments seven decades ago, as has our understanding of nuclear energy. Rosalyn Yalow, who, with her colleague Solomon Berson developed a radiation technique known as radioimmunoassay, which revolutionized medical analysis, won the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1977. Yalow did her work at the Bronx VA Hospital in New York City.

Allison Macfarlane, a geophysicist, is head of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Shirley Ann Jackson, a physicist who formerly headed the NRC, is now president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in upstate New York.

Among the women who hold key positions in the nuclear industry today are Kate Jackson, senior vice president and chief technology officer at Westinghouse Electric Company, and Ruth Ravitz Smith, senior vice president of global government relations at GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy. The organization U.S. Women in Nuclear has more than 5,500 members who work in nuclear and radiation-related fields around the country. 

Few people in Meitner’s time could have imagined to what extent advances in science and technology — and acceptance of the role of women in these fields — would transform modern life for the better.

