NJ needs a nuclear power expansion: Opinion.

The biggest problem we face with nuclear power is not having enough of it.

New Jersey’s economic growth depends on an abundant, reliable supply of clean energy. Currently, our state obtains approximately half of its electricity from nuclear power, which is emission-free. But the last order for a nuclear plant for which construction was actually completed was in 1974.

In recent years, U.S. electric utilities have become increasingly dependent on a single fuel with a history of price volatility: natural gas.

A contributing factor to upward pressure on natural gas prices is competition from multiple essential industrial uses for the substance, using about 40 percent of available supply.

In the competition to provide base-load power, as the cost of gas-fired electricity goes up, nuclear becomes increasingly attractive as the most cost-effective alternative. There are no competing industrial uses of civilian nuclear power.

Because nuclear power is needed for fuel and technological diversity, the government is providing incentives to kick-start the renewal of nuclear plant construction. Five new plants using advanced technologies are being built in the United States and a dozen others are planned, but many more need to be added to the electric grid to meet the increasing demand for electricity and to replace fossil-fuel plants that are being retired.

For New Jersey to increase its use of nuclear power, some serious changes in the state’s energy policy must be made. In 2012, New Jersey enacted a renewable portfolio standard, requiring utilities to obtain 20.4 percent of their electricity from renewable sources by 2020, including 4.1 percent from solar energy by 2027.

Unfortunately, solar and wind power remain limited by intermittency to about 20 percent capacity, therefore requiring backup nuclear or fossil fuel utilities anyway.

Nuclear plants run at more than 90 percent capacity these days. There still is no proven storage technology that would make either wind or solar a base-load provider.

In addition, hundreds to thousands of square miles are necessary for these inefficient installations, while a 1000-mW nuclear plant can be built on less than one-half square mile.

Environmental costs of renewables include killing large numbers of endangered bird species by windmills and, increasingly, by solar panels, which simulate water to their eyes and create glare that affects airline pilots. Solar, wind and other renewable sources should not be subsidized. The renewable portfolio standard should be eliminated.

Nuclear waste is being stored safely, mainly in dry casks, at nuclear plant sites. Alison MacFarlane, the geophysicist chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, states the waste can safely stay where it is for about 300 years.

Absent a deep-geologic repository such as the one planned at Yucca Mountain in Nevada, we should follow the approach used in France and Great Britain, where nuclear waste is stored as chunks of glass packed in stainless steel containers and buried a few hundred feet underground in an interim storage facility.

The United States has a fleet of about 100 nuclear plants, accounting for one-fifth of the nation’s electricity generating capacity with no airborne emissions. In New Jersey alone, the state’s four nuclear plants have prevented the emission of 95,812 tons of sulfur dioxide associated with acid rain, 29,927 tons of nitrogen oxide associated with smog, and more than 28.4 million metric tons of carbon dioxide, according to the Energy Information Administration.

The leading technological option for reducing air pollution while providing consistent reliable electricity supply is nuclear energy. Currently, 70 nuclear plants are being built around the world, according to the World Nuclear Association. An additional 150 are in the planning stage, and 340 more have been proposed. Worldwide, 437 nuclear plants are in operation, including those in the United States.

It’s past time to recognize the economic and environmental value of nuclear power, something that will remain an essential part of New Jersey’s energy supply well into the future.

