Should the World Increase Its Reliance on Nuclear Energy?

Yes: Climate Change Demands It.

In a world with limited need for energy and no danger of climate change, it would be fine to be antinuclear. However, this isn't the world we inhabit.

In the real world, a growing population of seven billion will reach as much as 10 billion by midcentury, most living in the emerging countries whose dramatic economic progress requires vast quantities of cheap energy. If this energy comes primarily from fossil fuels, we face a devastating degree of global warming.

Most nuclear opponents persist in the belief that all this future growth—together with continued high energy use in the industrialized world—can somehow be accommodated by wind, solar and other yet-to-be-developed renewables. Undoubtedly some can. But there is not the remotest chance that renewables plus energy efficiency alone can do the job. Currently wind and solar together add up to less than 2% of global electricity production. That proportion can and should increase, but sustainable declines in carbon emissions will require much more.

There are only two proven technologies that can deliver large-scale, predictable electricity without carbon emissions. One is hydroelectricity. It's relatively safe, but big dams impose substantial ecological and social costs, and hydro can't be scaled up much more because of geographical limitations. The second is nuclear power. Much misunderstood and long opposed by greens, it has the potential to scale up quickly and substantially enough to make a significant contribution to tackling both climate change and energy security.

Overstated Danger.

Most antinuclear arguments are either overstated or complete myths. One is that radiation at any level is life-threatening. In fact, radiation is a relatively weak carcinogen and one our bodies are well-accustomed to dealing with because of natural radiation from rocks, the atmosphere and space. Routine emissions from nuclear-power stations are so infinitesimally trivial by comparison that they cannot possibly affect anyone's health.

Even when the worst happens, the effects are overstated. Not a single fatality can yet be ascribed to radiation released in last year's Fukushima disaster, and 26 years after Chernobyl, scientists tracking those exposed to the radiation from that disaster have found no greater amount of birth defects or fatal cancers than those in the general population.

Most people also seem to assume that reactor technology has stood still over the years. In fact, modern reactor designs incorporate significant safety advances, and similar progress is being made in the disposal of nuclear waste. New reactor designs even enable existing waste stockpiles to be burned to generate low-carbon power, leaving a much smaller amount of less dangerous unusable material.

Worth the Cost.

There are currently 400 or so operating nuclear reactors in the world, generating about 13% of global electricity. We need many more, but there are real challenges that need to be overcome. The first is ill-considered opposition from environmentalists, which has distorted public policy for decades in many countries, notably Germany and the U.S.

The second is financing. Both nuclear and renewables share the problem of high capital costs, whereas competing fossil-fuel plants are cheap to build and relatively cheap to operate. It is important to remember, though, that while all low-carbon options will need substantial government support if they are to scale up sufficiently—and all should be pursued—nuclear holds the most promise for meeting the world's energy needs in the decades immediately ahead.

The third challenge is nuclear proliferation. Ideally the entire fuel cycle in every country would be under international supervision in order to avoid the possibility of fuel being diverted for bombs.

There is much to do and little time to do it in. Let's avoid repeating decades-old rancorous debates and instead look at solving the problems of climate change and rising energy demand using the best technologies available. Today that means nuclear power is an essential part of the mix, and its use must grow substantially.