Is There Any Such Thing as “Peaceful” Atomic Power? Is it really “Safe, Clean, and Too Cheap to Meter?”

It’s an outright lie to define nuclear power as “safe, clean, and too cheap to meter.” A phrase that Harry Shearer uses in his weekly news segment about the dangers of nuclear power. Over 13,000 people in Taipei, Taiwan protesting their nation’s three nuclear power plants (and the fourth that was to be launched) know that. They’re aware that Taiwan is located at the juncture of two tectonic plates and is subject to regular earthquakes. 

They’ve seen what’s happened in Fukushima, Japan (a nuclear disaster equal to Chernobyl, where a large area of rural land is still uninhabitable after 25 years). The difference is that the Fukushima Daiichi disaster is still progressing. We’re finding out more every day about widespread contamination of land, crops, seafood, and eastward dispersal of nuclear fallout. The Japanese government has revealed that residents of some of the towns closest to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant may not be able to return home for several decades. Radiation levels in those towns have been measured at 25 times the level currently considered safe by the Japanese government.

In their demonstration at the end of April the Taiwanese were asking for closure of the three existing plants and for the fourth to be turned into a museum about the dangers of nuclear power. Germany will be phasing out their nuclear power plants. So why aren’t the people of the US out in the streets demanding the same things?

To understand our ignorance we need to explore the interconnections of nuclear weapons and nuclear power plants that led to President Dwight D. Eisenhower creating the “atoms for peace” program at the United Nations in 1953. These connections explain why (almost 60 years later) we still have no safe and dedicated storage facilities for nuclear waste but still encourage new nuclear reactors.

There’s a series of interconnections between nuclear weapons, the non-proliferation treaty (NPT), nuclear disarmament, and control of nuclear waste and nuclear power generation. From the start the processes involving production of plutonium and enriched uranium for nuclear weapons were intertwined with the development of nuclear power reactors. We needed a palatable domestic reason to produce such dangerous materials. As we began to dismantle nuclear weapons we needed a place to use the fissile materials. So US taxpayers began paying nuclear power corporations (in the form of loan guarantees and disaster insurance) to burn uranium and plutonium in reactors to produce steam that created electricity. A pretty dangerous way to boil water, to say nothing of the large amounts of external power and of precious water needed for cooling, monitoring and controlling the reactors (not exactly “green” or inexpensive).

In 1981, Dr. Amory Lovins, director of the Rocky Mountain Institute in Colorado, said: “Every known route to bombs involves either nuclear power or materials and technology which are available, which exist in commerce, as a direct and essential consequence of nuclear power.” As Nuclear Energy Information Service says on their website: “In order to get plutonium for weapons, one needs a reactor, whether it is a “research” reactor (such as the one which provided India with the fissile material for its first atomic bomb). or a commercial reactor.”

Then there’s the arrangement that the Tennessee Valley Authority made in 2000 to allow two power reactors to begin producing tritium for use as nuclear weapons triggers and boosters for the explosive power of nuclear bombs. Before 1998 the tritium was recycled from obsolete weapons or produced in special production reactors at Savannah River in SC. When it looked as if more might be needed it was convenient to use nuclear power plants for its production. That’s the same tritium that’s leaking into our groundwater, and rivers, and streams from nuclear power plants and nuclear waste pools today.

One of the reasons that the nuclear power industry, represented by companies such as Excelon, Entergy and other nuclear power corporations who buy power plants at pennies on the dollar and operate them for maxim profits without performing proper maintenance or safety upgrades, can get away with such secrecy has to do with their co-creation with the nuclear weapons program. They’ve learned to withhold information and mislead the general public with “national defense” privileges of secrecy, security and isolation. For an excellent overview of the dangers of nuclear fuel storage that the US public rarely hears about you can read this report by Robert Alvarez, a former senior adviser to the US Secretary of Energy.

In a special series, “Aging Nukes” published by the Associated Press (AP) this June reporters revealed a decades long relationship between the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the nuclear power corporations. They’ve been working together to lower the standards for safety and maintenance to keep the aging plants operating within “legal limits”. When a plant exceeds those standards then the NRC undertakes some “research” that determines that the previous standards were “overly conservative.” If that doesn’t work then they give out waivers, amendments or special exceptions to allow the plants to keep on running well past their safe lifespans. As a result of such non-regulation, the AP reports that radioactive tritium has leaked from 48 of the 65 commercial nuclear power plants usually entering groundwater through corroded pipes. In leaks from at least 37 of those plants there were concentrations that well exceeded Federal safe drinking water standards, sometimes by as much as hundreds of times the limits. What’s more, the discovery of tritium is often the forerunner to less easily seen elements like radioactive iodine and cesium.

Since current technology doesn’t allow for detailed evaluation of underground pipes and power cables, it’s difficult to tell just how bad the leaks are. Some of those same pipes are supposed to bring water to the core and to the waste pools for cooling and preventing meltdowns. Another common safety problem in our aging nuclear reactors is what’s called “embrittlement” deterioration and weakening that happens in the steel cores around the reactors because of bombardment by neutrons over time. That’s a problem that caused the closure of the Yankee Rowe, MA, nuclear power plant in the 1990’s.

In case you’re thinking that our nuclear power plants are safer than those in Japan or the Ukraine you might want to know that Vermont Yankee, with its already documented safety problems, is a 42 year old, General Electric Mark 1 reactor that’s exactly the same design as Fukushima Daiichi. One difference is that Vermont Yankee’s spent fuel rods contain more radioactivity than all of the spent fuel rods in the four damaged reactors in Fukushima combined. It’s good that the people of Vermont, Massachusetts, New York and New Hampshire aren’t waiting for the NRC to shut this dangerous neighbor down in 2012.

Jeff Patterson, from Physicians for Social Responsibility spoke recently about the three most dangerous aspects of nuclear power. He defined them as the “three poisonous P’s”:

Pollution: Through the entire fuel cycle from mining to waste disposal, (which also adds health and environmental costs that continue over decades, perhaps even centuries).

Price: The most expensive form of power generation if you count the cost of nuclear accidents and the cost of building and indemnifying a new nuclear power plant.

Proliferation: Nuclear power development and nuclear proliferation go hand in hand. I would add that the two things that contribute most to proliferation are corruption and war or instability in the countries that have nuclear materials.

Two more factors allow the continued advocacy for nuclear power in the United States, in spite of the known dangers and health risks. Those are Propaganda by the nuclear power industry and Profiteering that’s protected by lobbying and by media control. It’s an immoral prioritizing of short-term profits against the health and welfare of the entire world.