Science, intelligent design aren’t compatible.

According to a National Geographic survey, 77 percent of Americans believe in the existence of aliens. Thousands claim to have seen UFOs traveling the night sky, and others testify that they came into contact with creatures from outer space after abductions or during chance encounters.

Given the popularity of the alien belief, and the amount of evidence, albeit unreliable and highly subjective, to support it, perhaps Ball State University should encourage its biology department to include lectures on alien abduction and speculation on aircraft visiting Earth from other planets.

After all, some people are advocating that Ball State allow instructors in the natural sciences to smuggle creationism into the classroom in the container they call intelligent design. If Ball State President Jo Ann Gora were to allow intelligent design in chemistry, physics or biology classrooms, she should also, in the interest of fairness and diversity, hire a few faculty members who have cultivated expertise in theories pertaining to space aliens.

I am not denying the possibility of life on other planets, just as I am not denying the possibility of a creator of all life. I am merely attempting to put cautionary tape around the trap door that exists underneath the argument for permitting ideas into scientific classrooms that do not measure up to the standards of scientific fact.

The theory of evolution, for example, meets the rigorous criteria of scientific theory. It is not, as many people believe, a “theory,” according to the colloquial use of the term, as in, “I have a theory where you might have lost your keys.”

A scientific theory makes falsifiable predictions with consistent accuracy across a broad area of scientific inquiry. It rests on a foundation of support of many independent strands of evidence. It is consistent with pre-existing scientific laws, and it is able to adapt to new discoveries.

Intelligent design, as a theological or philosophical theory, is interesting and worthy of consideration in theology and philosophy courses. As a scientific theory, however, it fails to touch even one of the standards for inclusion in that rare and elite category.

One of the most troubling developments I’ve noticed as an instructor at the college level is that many students have no awareness of the difference between an opinion and an argument. The combination of societal coddling and poor schooling has poisoned them into believing that all ideas are equally valid, and that their feelings, which motivate all of their opinions, entitle them to constant praise and pampering.

An argument, unlike an opinion, is based on evidence. It must have an objective basis to become worthy of serious scrutiny. People who do not know how to distinguish between an argument and an opinion are easily manipulated into believing such successful political programming as “If you like your plan, you can keep it” and “Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction.”

The faith-based call for degrading science education at the university level is one more method of making the populace less intelligent and less capable of dealing with the demands of democratic governance.

Ball State and President Gora deserve celebration and support for their resistance to such an ugly trend, and for their defense of real science, real knowledge and real argument.