Opinion: Nuclear energy can be an ally in the fight against climate change.

Is there a chance that America’s environmental community will drop its opposition to nuclear power? Not if it clings to the myth that a combination of conservation and renewable energy sources alone will be enough to stem the worst effects of climate change.

But do the actions of environmentalists really matter? Absolutely. People such as Rachel Carson, Barry Commoner and Ralph Nader — their opposition to nuclear power notwithstanding — raised public awareness about the need to control environmentally destructive practices. Thanks to their efforts, which were often debunked, policies and legal safeguards were adopted that stand as a stunning achievement.

The task now is no less daunting and even more crucial to mitigating the crisis we are in. It is critical that a new generation of environmentalists begin to grapple with the inconvenient truths that fighting global climate change takes clean energy and supplying clean energy will require zero-carbon-emitting nuclear power.

Yes, the nuclear industry has made mistakes — the partial meltdown at Three Mile Island, for example — but each nuclear utility has spent millions of dollars and thousands of hours to make sure its plant is safe and dependable. The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission and industry organizations such as the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations are constantly looking for ways to improve safety. The excellent safety record proves it: There has been not a single fatality from a radiation-related nuclear power plant accident in the United States. No other heavy industry can match nuclear power’s safety record.

There is good reason to give nuclear power a fresh look. It can replace fossil-fuel-burning power plants for generating electricity 24/7, avoiding air pollution and carbon dioxide emissions that could contribute to global warming.

According to climatologist James Hansen, longtime head of NASA’s Goddard Institute who first brought global warming to the attention of Congress in 1988, nuclear power globally has prevented 1.8 million air-pollution-related deaths and 64 gigatons of greenhouse gas emissions that would have resulted from burning fossil fuels. By mid-century, its use could prevent up to an additional 7 million deaths and 240 gigatons of greenhouse gas emissions, Hansen says.

There is a humanitarian imperative to using nuclear power. More than 2 billion people still lack access to electricity for basic needs such as clean water, cooking, sanitation and light. Nuclear power has the most potential to close the gap in energy availability between the world’s rich and its disadvantaged people.

Many countries are counting on nuclear power to help provide the energy they need for economic development without loading the atmosphere with greenhouse emissions. Worldwide, 73 nuclear plants are under construction, including five in the United States, and another 150 are planned and more than 340 are proposed.

Global energy demand, driven in large part by China and India, is projected to rise about 35 percent by 2040, even with significant gains in energy efficiency. Natural gas, though cleaner than coal, has its own environmental problems, accounting for about 20 percent of U.S. greenhouse emissions.

Renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power are useful, but too limited. Nuclear power, by contrast, can produce a large amount of energy from a small amount of fuel.

The International Energy Agency has called for urgent action to increase low-carbon energy production, including nuclear power. The agency said that global carbon emissions rose by a record 1.2 percent in 2012, putting the planet on a path likely to result in temperature increases of up to 9 degrees Fahrenheit.

Since the technology and know-how for producing nuclear-generated electricity is homegrown, the United States should take a leadership role in its development. Due to the high capital cost of building large nuclear plants, the future lies with small modular reactors built in factories and transported to nuclear sites. These reactors can be added incrementally as the need for power arises.

One of the more promising designs, an alternative to the conventional light-water reactor, is the traveling wave reactor — so called because the fuel moves through the reactor core in a wave, making it impossible for the fuel to melt down. Another breakthrough technology is the integral fast reactor, which produces much less waste; it has been successfully demonstrated in France.

The bottom line is that nuclear power is not the problem, but part of the solution. Together with further improvements in energy efficiency and renewable energy sources, it can have a major positive impact in the battle against climate change.

Expanding the use of nuclear power won’t be easy, but it’s essential to helping bring greenhouse gas emissions down to safe and acceptable levels. This will be less difficult to achieve if the environmental community reaches out to the nuclear industry to help make it happen. And vice versa.