Why You Should Question the Vaccine.

There’s a lot of decisions we have to make once we become parents. Will we work? Will we stay at home? Will our baby be born at home, breastfed, a co-sleeper? Who will their doctor be? And one of the most important decisions of all, will we…should we…vaccinate our baby?

There’s no issue more controversial and there’s no getting around it. From the moment conceiving a baby enters your brain you’ll be bombarded and pressured to vaccinate. Throughout your entire pregnancy, at the birth of your baby, at well-child check-ups, when/if your child first attends daycare, when they go to school, and you’ll even get the stare-down, brush-off, and cold-shoulder, from some pro-vaccine parents if they find out you’re even considering not vaccinating your child. 

And if you choose to forgo, you’ll be pressured and ridiculed – by the media, by your doctor, and by people who in their fear, haven’t done the research you have. You’ll be blamed for every “vaccine-preventable” illness and even though vaccine herd immunity does not exist, you’ll be responsible for its demise.

It’s a heavy burden to bear – the ridicule of a society that’s misguided; but to me, a mama, it’s better than the alternative. You see, there’s a misconception out there that those of us who choose not to vaccinate are merely “internet moms” who read silly articles for fun and in our ignorance, stupidity, or lack of education throw our children into the realm of whimsy. We clearly have no idea what we’re doing, how to parent, and for goodness sake we’re putting everyone at risk. Who would do such a thing? 

Personally, I would like to know who created that stereotype because I know many parents who have chosen not to vaccinate and not one of them is what I would call an “internet mom.” In fact, most of them are highly intelligent, educated, and articulate human beings who have actually read the studies and can state their position very well. Still, you don’t have to have a college degree to take an educated stance on your issue, you just have to have a little common sense and be willing to do some research.

I know, I know, you saw something on the evening news, read an ad in a magazine, got a lecture from your doctor who, by the way, was not trained on the subject of vaccinations in medical school and probably hasn’t even read the package insert. And let’s not forget the picture…you know, that one of the destitute child in a third-world country (that looks nothing like America) living in impoverished, dirty, conditions that contracted measles.

Here’s my advice, stop watching the news, put down your magazine, and start asking questions. If history repeats itself (and it usually does) everyone SHOULD question vaccinating their child.

Remember when doctors recommended smoking?

Yes, cancer sticks were physician tested and approved! Cigarettes were supposed to protect your throat and prevent coughs. Good thing some ordinary person questioned the “science.”

Remember when blood-letting was the cure-all for all health conditions? Of course you don’t. You weren’t born but this famous man named George Washington died from it, come to think of it, so did everyone else.

Remember when Doctors used to recommend, prescribe, and promote the health benefits of heroin? Opps…this killed a bunch of people too and created an entire society of drug dependents.

Got a toothache? How about some cocaine?

Oh, and then there was this little deadly chemical called DDT that you were supposed to spray on everything…including your children. Pretty ironic that DDT toxicity mirrored the same symptoms as paralytic polio. Good thing the maker of DDT had a vested interest in the vaccine (that is now causing cancer in the baby boomer generation). Boy, I’m sure glad someone questioned that. Seems like common sense that we should not spray our kids with insecticide, but we did it anyway. Below is an add from a 1947 TIME Magazine. Check out Dr. Suzanne Humphries’ speech on Polio and DDT.

How soon is too soon to introduce your baby to soda? “For a fact you can give this sparking drinks to babies  - and without any qualm. Lots of mothers do just that! Just read the ingredients on the 7-up bottle and you’ll see why!”

Want to lose weight? Help yourself to some diabetes! We now know that sugar causes weight gain and increases appetite, and causes heart disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and cancer.

Ah yes, the turn of the 20th century where breast was not best. Actually, milk powder and karo syrup was much healthier for your infant. Good thing we finally figured it out.

Oh, wishful thinking. Many “experts” are now urging women to delay breastfeeding (based on this study) so that the antibodies in breast milk won’t negate the effectiveness (or lack thereof) of the rotovirus vaccine. Seriously? Are you kidding me?

And let’s talk about fluoride.

Oh wait, that’s right, fluoride is classified as a poison by the EPA and causes dental fluorosis, tooth erosion, neurological damage, and cancer. Despite being banned in 98% of European countries and several cities across the U.S, dentists (and now doctors) recommend regularly drowning your baby in fluoride treatments the moment the first tooth pops in. 

Anyone remember Vioxx? This drug killed 60,000 people before it was pulled off of the market. Ironically the same day Merk removed it from the market the FDA approved it’s use for children.

And let’s not forget one of the worst cases of bad medicine to grace the planet. Thalidomide was recommended to millions of pregnant women for morning sickness. They were told it was perfectly safe. Here were the results:

And if I get pregnant, I’m supposed to get the flu shot, Tdap, and MMR…all of which have not been tested or proven safe for pregnant women? Yeah…I don’t think so.

Oh, what’s that? You want to see some vaccine propaganda hypocrisy? Sure, why not. But just a few because we could seriously be here all day with this one. 

Would you rather have a polio or cancer? Despite the fact that polio was almost completely eradicated before the vaccine came on the scene (and actually rarely manifests in paralysis), the vaccine was pushed anyway; and guess what, millions of people now have cancerous tumors that contain the same SV-40 virus the Salk polio vaccine just happened to be contaminated with.

What about whooping-cough? We’ve all seen this t.v. commercial ad (in fact, I can hear the baby coughing in my head). What the ad probably didn’t tell you is that the baby with pertussis had probably been vaccinated. Yes, the pertussis outbreaks are occurring almost exclusively in the vaccinated population. The CDC admits the failure of its own vaccine but you can still see this ad on t.v. and despite the vaccine’s risk, and your increased susceptibility to getting the disease, you should not only get vaccinated, but should do so more often, especially if you’re pregnant…because this seems logical.

And then there’s the HPV vaccine…

What this ad should say is “Would you deny her of children?” since the HPV vaccine is associated with infertility. Let’s assume for a minute the vaccine does prevent cancer. Cervical cancer is rare to begin with and highly preventable and treatable with regular pap smears. The vaccine “protects” against only 4 of the 100 strains of HPV (for up to four years) that could cause cervical cancer. And oh, 98% of the time HPV doesn’t even lead to cancer. Forget the fact that this vaccine has not been tested for safety or efficacy in young girls (and boys) and was pulled off the market in other countries for causing severe harm to women and infertility. Should I even address the misleading use of the word “cure” here? And we call this “evidenced-based” medicine.

I don’t know about you, but my daughter will be one less…one less who says yes to the HPV vaccine.

I could certainly show you more vaccine propaganda along with thousands of pictures of vaccine injured children, but you see them everyday. Children with cancer, asthma, autism, allergies, ear infections, Crohn’s disease, diabetes, neurological disorders, behavioral issues, seizures, SIDS, meningitis, and death at record numbers..the highest level of any industrialized country actually.

Still think you shouldn’t question the vaccine? Regardless of your ultimate decision, can you really afford not to? Judging from past history, it seems like questioning is the smart thing to do.