The great dithering over climate change.

How much do you care about the future? If you're like most people, you do care - but maybe not so much that you are willing to make radical changes to your life for the sake of things that will happen a hundred years from now. And that, in essence, is why we seem to be watching helplessly as climate change overtakes us.

The oceans have not risen much yet, just about 8 inches over the last century. But the rate of increase is speeding up as the amount of carbon in the atmosphere increases. Current estimates for the year 2100 range from 1 to 6 feet of increase, the consensus falling in the middle of that range. But after 2100, the seas will keep going up. We are locked into several centuries of sea-level rise because of the greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere and the warming that has already taken place in the ocean.

How long it will take for the sea level to increase is uncertain, but we do know it's a matter of historical time, not geological time - of centuries, not millennia. If the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets substantially melt, as they are predicted to do with global temperature increases between 2 and 7 degrees Fahrenheit, they would contribute an additional 10 to 20 feet to the sea level. The potential maximum, if we lost all the permanent ice on the Earth, is 212 feet of rise in the sea level.

How likely is it that we will reduce our carbon emissions in time to avoid the worst outcomes? How much more carbon are we going to emit?

One way of thinking about the problem is that it comes down to how much fossil fuel we can leave in the ground. To keep warming below 4 degrees Fahrenheit, we need to leave, unburned, two-thirds of all known remaining reserves of coal, oil and gas in the ground. But will we be able to do that?

There is a name for the new geological epoch we have entered: the Anthropocene, the era in which humans have caused profound changes to the outer layer of the Earth.

There is also a name for the period of historical time we have entered, which I suggest we take from Kim Stanley Robinson, one of the great writers of our time: the Dithering. As seen from Robinson's science fiction-imagined future, this is the period of human history, following modernism and postmodernism, in which humanity failed to act rapidly or decisively enough to avert catastrophic climate change.

In the quarter-century since NASA scientist James Hansen alerted the public to the threat posed by human-caused global warming, emissions have only increased. It's not that we have done nothing to address the problem; it's that what we have done is so minimal that it is dwarfed by everything we've done to make the problem worse. I think it is fair to say that much of the general public, at least in the United States, has no idea just how far-reaching the changes are going to be if we continue down this path.

Should we care about something that might not happen for hundreds of years? Of course we should. But can we get ourselves to care enough?

Climate change is the worst kind of problem for the human brain to cope with - something that is too slow-moving to give us the rush of adrenaline that signals "emergency," something that is so diffuse in its causes that it requires collective action at a scale that humanity has never managed. We all put it out of our minds most of the time. We all live life as normally as we can under the shadow of an increasingly uncertain "long run."

Thus far, we are blocked from taking action at the national level. And at the international level, we don't even have a conceivable way to compel the large countries of the world to work together. For now, most of the meaningful action is occurring at the state and local level. We in the Bay Area have the opportunity to lead the way. We are highly educated. We have a culture that is open to change. We have a natural setting that inspires environmental values. We are not debating whether climate change is real. We have one of the strongest economies in the world, meaning we can generate the resources to take action. The Bay Area is probably one of the best-positioned places in the world to create a working model of how an urbanized coastal region can cope with climate change.

We need to be ambitious enough to try to retrofit our region to live within a carbon budget that is sustainable for the planet. In other words, we should be striving to make the Bay Area carbon neutral. The Bay Area can model for the rest of the United States how to curb emissions and adapt to the climate change we've already locked ourselves into - while continuing to demonstrate that such measures do not come at the expense of prosperity. With any luck, we will be joined by other progressive, urbanized regions around the country to scale up our impact.

What stands in the way of action to save the world?

At the local level in the Bay Area (and across California), we've created a system that requires years of meetings and process before anything can be done. High-speed rail is a perfect example of the kind of system-level change we need to be implementing quickly, creating a viable replacement for car travel and air travel, but it is taking decades. And while the Bay Area needs to channel all of its growth into walkable, transit-served locations, we still endlessly debate the merits of every individual building no matter how close to transit it is. If you believe that there is time urgency to cutting the American contribution to global climate change, the current system of endless process over action constitutes a moral failure.

But even if we succeed beyond our wildest dreams in the Bay Area, our historical emissions and others' continued emissions could cause sea level to rise to inundate our cities. We are entering an era of profound change and loss, no matter what we wish. Our task now is contradictory: to fight climate change even while we try to learn to live with it.
