One Opinion: Why your child should receive routine vaccinations.

The decision whether or not to vaccinate your child is a difficult one. On the one hand, medical science has brought us to a time when childhood diseases that used to ravage populations (and still do in other parts of the world) have been mostly eradicated thanks to vaccines and compulsory vaccination programs. On the other, what is in those vaccines, anyway? And could the chemicals that we inject into our children be doing more harm than good?

The biggest controversy over vaccines is the supposed, but repeatedly disproven, link between autism and the Measles – Mumps – Rubella vaccine (also known as the MMR). As autism rates began skyrocketing across the country, some parents began to question whether it had anything to do with the MMR vaccine. After all, some kids who appeared to be perfectly normal seemed to have changed virtually overnight after receiving the shot. Even presidential candidate John McCain has spoken out on the controversy, suggesting that there is, in fact, a correlation between the vaccine and autism.

Very recently, the government did settle a controversial case with a young girl’s family, conceding that perhaps a series of 5 vaccinations given in one day could have caused the girl’s autistic disorder. But! It could have also been caused by a routine fever. Organizations that link vaccinations to autism declared a victory, but it’s not as cut-and-dry as all that. Turns out, the girl had a rare pre-existing mitochondria disorder that may (or may not) have been exacerbated by the vaccines. Or it could have been caused by a fever. The point is, this is not a case where a perfectly healthy child was struck down with autism after being vaccinated. The case ultimately proves nothing, except that in the rarest of instances vaccinations might contribute to autistic disorders. Or perhaps not.

But in spite this one court case, after years of study, in multiple countries, time and time again, no link has been found between the MMR vaccine and autism.

And yet, parents are growing increasingly terrified of vaccinating their kids. In fact, the number of parents opting-out of vaccination programs has more than doubled between 1991 and 2004, from 1% to 2.54%. And this is alarming.

The truth of the matter is autism is a truly horrific disease, and as such, parents have made the emotional calculus that its better to risk their child catching measles, mumps or rubella, or perhaps whooping cough, than it is to risk their child becoming autistic. But it’s a calculation that’s based on a fear of the unknown rather than the facts. And it’s a calculation that is costing us all.

San Diego recently had an outbreak of measles, with 12 children becoming ill. 9 of the children had not received the MMR vaccine. And this clearly illustrates the problem. For vaccination programs to work effectively and eradicate disease, the majority of the population must be vaccinated. There are always holes in vaccination programs. Children have to be a certain age to receive some shots, and adults often outgrow the effectiveness of vaccines. But this isn’t a problem as long as the majority of all children have been vaccinated against these diseases. However, if an unvaccinated child brings home whooping cough from school, it might be an inconvenient illness for them, but it could be deadly for their infant sister. If an unvaccinated child contracts measles at the playground, they might be miserable for a little while, but it could potentially kill their grandfather with the suppressed immune system.

Parents who refuse to vaccinate their children because of unfounded hysteria linking vaccines to autism, or worse, out of some distrust of the pharmaceutical industry’s motives, are ultimately being short-sighted and selfish. By forgoing vaccinations, these parents place not only their own children at risk to contract diseases that we’ve had the luxury of forgetting, but they put the rest of their communities and all of our families at risk for deadly preventable diseases, as well.

