Supporting Nonsense Over Science.

As an investigator in genetic disease, and as a scientifically literate citizen, I cannot allow Wilbert Rosin's attack on evolution, and on science itself, to go unanswered. It is the practice of newspapers to present ‘both sides' of issues, giving each side equal weight. In matters of politics, both sides of any issue can produce seeming experts to lend credibility to their arguments, so that journalists and the public cannot easily determine which side has greater legitimacy. Sadly, this is often the goal of politicians. Public discourse is not about finding the truth; It is about winning. That view is anathema-indeed, is viscerally sickening-to those who practice science. That Mr. Rosin apparently views mainstream scientists as intellectual sheep, uncritically accepting of evolution, shows that he simply does not know any scientists. It is the drive to find novelty that motivates us. To spend our days replowing old ground, reproving the proven, would be no fun at all. Science is inherently a competition of ideas. We delight in bashing each other's ideas, in the process more formally known as peer review. Not only do the driving motivations of scientists favor new ideas, the NIH funding process itself favors new ideas. The NIH has introduced specific funding criteria favoring grant proposals that challenge existing paradigms. If our ideas are not both testable and innovative, we're out of business.

In real science, ideas that cannot withstand repeated objective tests simply disappear. Counter to Mr. Rosin's ludicrous assertion, science has not ‘gone far beyond Darwin'. Instead, the genomic revolution of the last 20 years has brought evolution to the level of the DNA molecule. The new evidence is not merely consistent with Darwin's key ideas, it is stunningly supportive and amplifying. Just to name some examples, we now know that our genomes are mostly ‘extra' DNA, without clear function. This DNA has accumulated because it carried no cost, yet it provides the raw material for new functions. Amazingly, part of this extra DNA is ‘pseudogenes', sequences that were clearly once functional genes. Like ruined cities for archeologists, pseudogenes tell the story of where we have been as a species. That story is also told in the sequence of mitochondrial DNA and in ‘ancestral sequences', relatively intact segments of our DNA that can be traced to the earliest humans. If there had been no Darwin, it would have been necessary to hypothesize evolution again and again, based on the accumulating evidence, by all who have followed him.

What about Mr. Rosin's heroes, Phillip Johnson and William Dembski? These individuals have advanced their anti-evolutionary ideas only by shielding them from the light of peer review. While both men began as scientists, neither is a biologist. Neither of them has written a peer-reviewed paper on evolutionary theory. Johnson's book, Darwin on Trial, was written 20 years ago-prior to an entire molecular revolution that has only supported evolution. The book has no bibliography. This means that it offers no support for any of its assertions. To real scientists, this is unforgivable. This is a book for the gullible.

It is my hope that you do not take my word for anything I have said. Here is my challenge: Act like a scientist. Read for yourself any one of hundreds of reputable, peer-reviewed journals that deal with this topic (try Science, Nature, Genomics, Human Genome). See for yourself how the emerging evidence places our origins within nature, not outside of it. It is a fascinating story, a privilege to be alive to watch it unfold. And you paid for the research.

In his espousal of nonsense over science, Mr. Rosin has a lot of company. Among these are some who would be president. It grieves me, it scares me, that someone who is contemptuous of science, who cannot tell objective science from belief, might ever run this nation.