The World Needs Genetically Modified Foods.

Campaigns by well-fed activists would impose the tastes of the rich on the hunger of the poor.

The Whole Foods grocery chain recently announced its intent by 2018 to require labels on all foods with genetically engineered ingredients. This step was hailed as a game-changer by those campaigning to make such labels a federal requirement. Yet even without mandatory labeling, most genetically modified (or GMO) foods have already been driven out of our supermarkets.

People in wealthy countries can afford to live with this outcome. But in the long run, it will take important choices away from farmers and consumers in poor countries.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has long opposed the mandatory labeling of GMO foods because it agrees with a scientific consensus that these foods so far bring no new risks to human health or the environment. All of the leading national science academies in Europe have reached this conclusion. Three years ago, the Research Directorate of the European Union concluded that biotechnology, and in particular GMOs, "are not per se more risky than, for example, conventional plant breeding technologies."

Nonetheless, campaigns by activist groups such as Greenpeace have so scared consumers that most GMO food products have been kept out of the American marketplace.

A genetically modified wheat designed to reduce the cost of weed control was first field-tested in 1994, but in 2004 Monsanto decided not to go ahead with sales of wheat seeds when it became clear that American and Canadian farmers feared consumer resistance and lost export sales in Europe and Asia.

GMO rice that can be grown with less pesticide spray has been field-tested in the U.S. since 1990—but, for similar reasons, never commercialized. GMO potatoes that resist beetle damage were grown successfully in the U.S. from 1999 to 2001, but their cultivation was voluntarily suspended when food-service chains told farmers that they didn't want to be accused by activists of selling GMO french fries.

GMO tomatoes with a convenient trait that delays ripening were grown between 1998 and 2002, but cultivation was then suspended. GMO melons capable of resisting a virus have been successfully tested in the U.S. since 1989 but never planted commercially.

It is often reported that roughly 70% of foods in the U.S. contain some ingredients from genetically engineered crops, but most of those ingredients are byproducts such as oil, starch or sweeteners derived from just three GMO crops: soybeans, corn and sugar beets. If the U.S. enacted a mandatory labeling law, the impacts might be surprisingly small. To avoid the stigmatizing labels, food companies could reformulate many of their products, for example by turning to oil from non-GMO corn and soy, or by using non-GMO palm or sunflower oil. Byproducts from GMO corn and soy could then be diverted to industrial or biofuel use.

America's farmers might also find an acceptable workaround. Currently 98% of their soy and 88% of their corn is already employed as feedstock for biofuels or as animal feed, neither of which requires a label. But there would be a large downside in poor countries for moving further along this path.

Developing countries have significant unmet food needs, and GMO food crops are positioned to help. In Asia, poor consumers who currently don't get enough vitamin A from their rice-only diets could be better protected against blindness if their farmers had permission to plant so-called Golden Rice, which has been genetically engineered with high beta-carotene content.

Farmers and consumers in India currently exposed to toxic insecticides when they grow and eat eggplant could reduce their exposure if farmers had access to a GMO eggplant, Bt brinjal, that needs fewer chemical sprays. Farmers and consumers in East Africa currently vulnerable to hunger and destitution when drought hits their maize fields would be more secure if growers had permission to plant GMO drought-resistant varieties of white maize.

But if America, through a labeling system, joins Europe in embracing a new norm against the cultivation of GMO crops for human food, governments in developing countries, already skittish thanks to activist campaigns, will likely follow suit. The result would be a needless setback for the world's poorest and hungriest people.