Yes, global warming could mean more snow.

Here's a recent headline that caused a few double takes in Washington, D.C.: "Global warming hearing postponed because of snow."

Yes, nothing gives an unearned boost to global warming skeptics like back-to-back snowstorms variously nicknamed "snow-pocalypse" and "snow-mageddon," among other less-charitable labels in the nation's capital.

Oklahoma Republican Sen. James Inhofe, an outspoken skeptic of global warming and warm friend of his state's oil and gas industries, recently mocked Al Gore, climate activist and former vice president. Inhofe posted photos on his Facebook page of his family building an igloo near the Capitol with a sign that read "Al Gore's new home." Har, har.

But, contrary to popular belief, a robust snowfall does not mean global warming is a myth.

In fact, scientists have been warning for at least two decades that global warming could make snowstorms more severe. Snow has two simple ingredients: cold and moisture. Warmer air collects moisture like a sponge until it hits a patch of cold air. When temperatures dip below freezing, a lot of moisture creates a lot of snow.

A rise in global temperature can create all sorts of havoc, ranging from hotter dry spells to colder winters, along with increasingly violent storms, flooding, forest fires and loss of endangered species.

That's simple science even for me, a guy whose scientific education pretty much ended with the old "Watch Mr. Wizard" TV show and a subscription to Popular Mechanics.

Yet, confusion about that simple science is one of the reasons why experts and activists increasingly prefer the term "climate change" as less confusing and politically loaded than "global warming." Still, confusion and politics persist. Fox News host Sean Hannity cheerfully asserted that the storm "would seem to contradict Al Gore's hysterical global warming theories." His fellow Fox host Glenn Beck agreed, mocking the very idea that "warming" could lead to more snow.

Sure, it's laughable if you believe in the very unscientific theory of simple observational research, which means you base your views about global warming on your own weather.

Or, as Comedy Central's Stephen Colbert summarized the Fox News stars' view: "Whatever just happened is the only thing that's happening."

It is not so laughable when you are shoveling back-to-back snowstorms off your walk and driveway while your passing neighbors ask "What happened to global warming?" as cheerily as if they were asking the winter equivalent of "Hot enough for ya?"

What happened to global warming? Ask Vancouver. While the South and East Coast were trying to get rid of snow, the Winter Olympics was reported to be trucking in snow to its ski runs from three hours away.

Somehow global warming skeptics not only highlight their snowstorms. They ignore snow droughts too.

Even so, Inhofe and other lawmakers who are holding up President Barack Obama's proposed climate bill have been winning valuable gains in their public relations war against climate-change believers. Polls in the United States and the United Kingdom show skepticism about climate change has been rising. That's a reversal of trends that saw President George W. Bush, an early skeptic, move toward proposals to reduce greenhouse gases.

I don't necessarily agree with all of the alarm that Gore has expressed on climate change. Nor do I disagree with all of the skeptics who question how much climate change is caused by human activities like sport utility vehicles versus natural activities like belching cattle. But whatever you believe in the world of science, it is best to learn through the scientific method, not just Internet gossip and propaganda.

Public skepticism about climate change is healthy, if it is based on good scientific research. Unfortunately, in our polarized times too much of the debate is based simply on politics. With the future of the planet at stake, we owe it to ourselves to judge this debate by more than whatever weather condition happens to be happening at the moment. We owe it to our offspring too.