Huntsman believes in global warming.

I was happy to see Steve Chapman's piece about Jon Huntsman potentially being the best pick for the Republican presidential nomination on Sunday's editorial page (Question: Why not Jon Huntsman? Opinion, Nov. 20). Huntsman stands out as the only Republican presidential candidate who acknowledges that global warming is taking place. With carbon emissions growing faster in 2010 than even the worst case scenario outlined by climate scientists, the problem of climate change needs to be faced and addressed as rapidly as possible.

Despite the loud cries of climate change deniers, addressing climate change is a priority for many Americans. A recent survey conducted by Yale researcher Anthony Leiserowitz found that 70 percent of Americans, including 44 percent of Republicans, felt global warming should be a very high or moderate priority for the president and Congress.

Although Republicans in Congress currently refuse to move ahead on climate legislation, many conservatives outside of Congress are recognizing that a fee on carbon emissions paid by fossil fuel companies is the best way to quickly lower our carbon emissions. When the fee is combined with a full rebate of the revenues to the American people, the system is revenue neutral, does not add to government bureaucracy and encourages entrepreneurs to find ways to meet the resulting new demand for efficiency and renewable energy.

The resulting growth of the green economy will not only slow global warming but also bring new jobs and life to our economy. Legislation along these lines has been introduced in the U.S. House -- the Save Our Climate Act (H.R. 3242). The Yale study found that 65 percent of those surveyed supported a revenue neutral carbon tax that would reduce federal income taxes, help create jobs and decrease pollution. 51 percent of Republicans supported the idea.

Climate change threatens us all, regardless of political party. Huntsman is smart to respect the science on global warming. I hope that he moves up in the polls.