THE TRUTH ABOUT AUTISM. 

Amid cries of an epidemic and parental fears that childhood vaccines may instead be poisoning their kids, doctors try to put a rapid increase in diagnoses of the learning disability in perspective

About two years ago, a 9-year-old boy and his mother came to my office. Andy (I've changed his name to protect his privacy), a quiet, lanky kid with sandy brown hair, sat politely on the exam table while his mother told me his story.

He had a long history of learning problems and had been receiving tutoring for years. He was always the last kid to be picked for a sports team and never got invited to birthday parties. Not for lack of trying, but for some reason, he just never fit in.

Several months before coming to see me, Andy had been diagnosed with autism. He was articulate but didn't make much eye contact with me. When I asked about school, he talked about his interest in airplanes. Such behavior, his mother said, had been the norm for a long time.

Since learning of her son's diagnosis, Andy's mother had been vigilant. In her research, which she presented to me in a binder, she was positive about two things:

First, Andy was part of an epidemic of autism that has afflicted kids during the past 20 years. Second, the routine, life-saving vaccines that Andy had received during the first two years of his life had at least contributed to -- if not been -- the cause of his illness.

On both of these issues, nothing could have been further from the truth. But as autism continues to become a more high-profile health issue, the misconceptions are getting harder to dispel.

This was in evidence last week, when a federal claims court in Washington took the extraordinary step of setting up a special court to hear claims from families who contend that there is a link between increasing autism cases and children's vaccinations.

Before we examine the science of such claims, it's important to clarify exactly what autism is and how widespread it is.

When many of us think of autism, we remember Dustin Hoffman in the movie "Rain Man." He portrayed (very accurately) a man who was obsessive-compulsive, introverted, socially isolated -- classic characteristics of autism. But in reality, the disorder encompasses a broad spectrum of language, social and behavioral problems. These range from someone who fits the "Rain Man" profile -- a person who lives inside himself with little ability to interact with others -- to somebody like Andy, who in the past may have been called "slow" by his teachers with respect to his school problems, or "weird" by his peers when it came to making friends.

In fact, what Andy has is Asperger's syndrome, a form of autism in which children have no language problems but remain socially awkward. This subtlety of symptoms is what probably led to the delay in diagnosing him. Most children with Asperger's syndrome are not diagnosed until they are 8 to 10 years old.

There are estimates that the number of children with autism has increased anywhere from 300 percent to 1,000 percent during the past two decades. Identifying the reasons for this increase has been a source of controversy. Advocates such as Rick Rollens, co-founder of the Medical Investigation of Neurodevelopmental Disorders Institute at UC Davis and advocacy groups like Defeat Autism Now have declared that we're in a midst of an autism epidemic.

But the American Heritage Dictionary defines epidemic as "a rapid spread, growth or development," and sound research tells us that there is no epidemic. Instead, the increase in autism cases is due to a better understanding of the disorder and its prevalence.

There are many reasons for this better understanding. For starters, there is more professional and public awareness of autism. Also, we've expanded the definition of autism from the "Rain Man" profile to a spectrum that now includes individuals with milder cases, like those who have Asperger's syndrome. Both of these phenomena have occurred during the past 20 years, which is when the so-called epidemic began.