Nuclear plants help energy mix.

Is it right to send safe and efficient nuclear power plants into early retirement? And what about subjecting homes and businesses to the risk of high electricity prices from over-reliance on a single fuel — in this case natural gas?

Ginna, Indian Point, FitzPatrick, and Nine Mile Point — these New York nuclear plants are some of the power generators in jeopardy of being shut down prematurely unless federal, state and regional authorities take prompt action.

According to Peter Lyons, assistant Department of Energy secretary for nuclear energy, as many as 30 of the 100 nuclear plants in the U.S. fleet might be forced to close due to economic problems. Many, though safe and reliable, are unable to compete with cheap natural gas.

Losing these plants will weaken our energy mix and inevitably increase carbon emissions if they are replaced with more gas capacity.

Two nuclear plants — Kewaunee in Wisconsin and Vermont Yankee — are slated to close by the end of this year. And Chicago-based Exelon, which has the largest number of nuclear plants in the United States, has said that it may be forced to shut down its Clinton and Quad Cities plants.

Recently, Lyons warned that if nearly a third of the nation's nuclear plants are forced to close, there would be no way to meet the Obama administration's goal of cutting greenhouse-gas emissions 17 percent below 2005 levels by 2020. Nuclear power accounts for more than 60 percent of America's zero-carbon energy.

Losing New York's nuclear plants would require electricity users to pay more for whatever fuel they use, but especially natural gas. Nuclear plants generate 31 percent of the state's electricity, and are among our nation's most efficient plants, producing about 90 percent of their full capacity last year. By contrast, natural gas plants operate about 70 percent of the time and solar and wind power, which is subject to weather changes, runs about 20 percent.

Yet the electricity market has no mechanism for recognizing the value of nuclear power as a reliable source of emission-free base-load electricity, delivered as needed. Nuclear power contributes to the electricity system's fuel and technological diversity. And New York's nuclear power plants provide more than 2,300 jobs with an annual payroll of $274 million and pay more than $55 million in state and local taxes.

But if nuclear plants are forced to close, New York will face decreasing power reliability and higher-cost electricity from a natural gas monopoly. Despite the surge in gas production, demand for gas has grown rapidly and development of new pipeline capacity to deliver gas supplies to where they are needed is lagging.

Consequently, the spot price of natural gas soared this winter to more than 25 times its typical price in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic. Nuclear fuel costs are much less volatile than those of natural gas.

Generating electricity from a diverse mix of low-emission sources — the leader of which is nuclear power — is the best way to meet clean air requirements, maintain the stability and security of the grid, and hold down electricity prices.

To keep nuclear power in the ballgame, Gov. Andrew Cuomo needs to meet with those responsible for grid reliability: the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the state Public Service Commission, and New York Independent Service Operator, which operates the power grid. The group should consider the addition of nuclear power to the state's Renewable Portfolio Standard, which requires 30 percent of the state's power to come from renewable sources by 2030.

Despite producing the largest share of the state's emissions-free electricity, nuclear power was not included in the RPS. Correcting this oversight would be a clean win for New York's power mix.