Viewpoint: Climate change matter of science, not politics.

In the United States, everyone seems to have an opinion about everything. From politics to the economy, we Americans find no shortage of things to debate, discuss and opine over.

But when it comes to matters of science — most notably climate change science — it is curious that any Tom, Dick or Stanley seems to be able to make up his or her mind independent of the findings of the men and women who have devoted their lives to studying the matter.

With many climate scientists predicting disastrous results if the world’s governments do not act to reduce man-made emissions of greenhouse gasses, it seems as if the American public would be vigorously debating the best way to adapt our actions to prevent global warming.

However, at some point, the very existence of man-made climate change was taken from the realm of science and turned into a political issue, dividing believers and non-believers mostly along party lines. According to a March 2012 Gallop poll, only 53% of Americans believe that “global warming is caused by pollution resulting from human activities,” with only 36% of Republicans attributing changes in the climate to human action.

The same study also found that only 43% of Republicans believed that “most scientists believe that global warming is occurring.” This reflects a widespread notion that the scientific jury is still out on climate change, making any current political action on it premature.

But this notion is simply not true.

A 2010 study of the world’s top climate scientists found that 97-98% agreed on the basic tenets of anthropogenic climate change. Of the 1,372 scientists surveyed, the study also found that the “relative climate expertise and scientific prominence” of the unconvinced was “substantially below that of the convinced researchers”.

The scientific community is in near unanimous agreement — something rarely found among any group of experts — that climate change is happening and that humans are causing it.

So, with such a resounding proclamation from the scientists who study climate change, why does the American public still believe that the subject should fall into the realm of opinions?

Part of the problem is the immense complexity of the climate and the models that predict changes to it. To fully comprehend these models, one must devote a huge amount of time to studying the issue, usually by receiving a doctorate in the subject.

Unlike many other political issues, the models used to predict climate change cannot be fully explained in a debate or on the nightly news. This leave the public largely in the dark on the particular methods climate scientist use to arrive at their findings, opening the door for suspicion and disbelief.

The media has also played into the problem, often presenting climate scientists and skeptics not trained in climatology as equally reliable sources. This, along with a profound lack of discussion of the models central to climate scientists’ research, has led to a deep public misunderstanding of the subject.

What is also interesting — and perhaps frightening — is that college education and basic scientific literacy seem to have little effect on belief in climate change.

While we learn many things in college, the vast majority of us do not learn how to understand the complex models used by climate scientists in predicting future changes.

We should learn that on scientific matters such as climate change — unless we are highly trained climatologists — we must admit our own ignorance on the subject and defer to those who have spent their lives trying to understand the problems at hand.

Once the American public is able to accept this notion we will be able to debate how best to respond, allowing us to create a safe and prosperous future for generations to come.