Science Seeks Hard Evidence.

President Bush has weighed in on the debate on evolution vs. intelligent design (ID) by stating, "Both sides ought to be properly taught so people can understand what the debate is about."

At this rate, it appears that Bush may even endorse the requirement, which casts doubt on evolution, stipulated by the school district of Cobb County, Georgia. The district requires that all biology textbooks should be affixed with a sticker with the following disclaimer on evolution: "Evolution is a theory, not a fact, regarding the origin of living things. This material should be approached with an open mind, studied carefully, and critically considered."

Bush has every right to his opinion, but if he thinks that his opinion, which contradicts the methods of science, has to be made part of the science curriculum, then, "Crawford, we have a problem."

Of course, this problem can be resolved in a quid pro quo fashion if the president approves the affixing of stickers to scriptures of various faiths with the following words: "This book contains material on revelation. Religion is a theory, not a fact, regarding the creation of life and matter. This material should be questioned, its miracles challenged, and could be rejected for lack of evidence."

An ironic request like this will remind the president that every issue, including faith, has two sides to it: That is, those who embrace faith, purely on "faith," without requiring any supporting evidence, and those who reject faith because it is just a creation myth that was passed on to us by our ancestors.

It is unscientific for public school boards to require biology textbooks to carry a disclaimer that encourages students to turn a blind eye to the massive amounts of evolutionary evidence, from fossils to genetics. Because this evidence, when explained by the theory of evolution, makes a compelling case for natural selection.

Many school boards across the country are conducting hearings to determine the validity and veracity of the theory of evolution. These hearings are fundamentally flawed for two reasons: (1) Questioning a particular theory of science does not occur in school boards, but among scientists who pursue evidence in the field, conduct experiments in the laboratories and publish findings in scientifically peer-reviewed journals; (2) Why just pick on the theory of evolution while ignoring other theories -- such as the theory of relativity, atomic theory, germ theory and heliocentric theory, among others -- that constitute science?

With regard to the creation of species, the methods of science simply state: Show me either the evidence for the fingerprints left by the (invisible) intelligent designer or for evolution through natural selection of random mutations, and I will accept it. And, it has indeed accepted the latter, which was first proposed by Charles Darwin. In a nutshell, science demands eliciting evidence to support an explanation (theory) through systematic methods of critical thought and inquiry.

ID conveniently excludes evidence relating to the gradual evolution of species and complex organs such as the eye through natural selection, and simply concludes that complexity can't arise without a designer.

If a technologically advanced society places knowledge derived by objective data on par with supernatural explanations in a science textbook, it will devolve once again into a primitive society. We the people will pay a high price if we are disabled in our quest to be on the cutting edge of science and discovery, due to a misguided leadership keen on pandering to its base.