Dispelling Misinformation About Genetically Modified Crops.

Food is so central to our lives that all kinds of issues connected with it stir deep feelings. The question of labeling foods made from genetically modified crops is increasingly one such issue.

Should foods made from GM crops be labeled? And if so, should the labels be mandatory or voluntary? In an editorial Feb. 18, “License to label,” the Post-Dispatch raised these questions, along with several related topics regarding agriculture. I was glad to see the paper do so for two reasons.

As a mom myself, I know how important it is to be informed about food. Most of us play the key role in feeding our families, and we need to make smart decisions. Second, I have a professional interest; I work at Monsanto, a company that develops and sells seeds for all markets, including GM seeds, to help farmers grow food all over the world.

Unfortunately, misinformation about GM crops abounds, in part because we at Monsanto haven’t worked hard enough to dispel it. But we’re trying harder now, and I’d like to do my own part in that effort right here.

First, the suggestion of conflict in the statement that “the real battle over GMOs is between farmers and the seed producers” is a mischaracterization. Farmers are our customers. We don’t battle with them; that would hardly make for a winning business model. We serve our customers by offering them seeds that either prove their value in their fields or don’t. If they don’t, we lose a customer the next planting season.

Clearly farmers think they’re being well-served with these technologies, because every year since their introduction in 1996, GM seeds have gained broader grower adoption. Why? Because these crops offer farmers “substantial net environmental and economic benefits compared to conventional crops,” as the National Academies of Science put it in a 2010 report.

I’ll be specific. The NAS said farmers using GM seeds were finding their costs lowered and, because their harvests were bigger, their revenues increased. Farmers using GM seeds were also benefiting from “increased worker safety and greater simplicity and flexibility in farm management.”

Not only farmers benefit from the improved economics of GM farming; all of us do, with more affordable food. GM farming also helps make agriculture more sustainable, through reduced use of pesticides and fossil fuels; lower carbon dioxide emissions; conservation of soil and reduced water pollution; and many other benefits that are well-documented.

And most important, GM food has been repeatedly proved safe by food and health agencies across the globe, from the Food and Drug Administration to the American Medical Association to the World Health Organization. Organics — which, it should be noted, actually are generally grown with pesticides — have no edge over GM foods in these areas. Both GM and organic are important technologies that have a role to play in meeting future demand and providing choice to consumers.

All that said, consumers obviously do have a right to know what’s in their food and the right to buy non-GM foods. What is perhaps not fully appreciated, however, is that consumers are already exercising those rights, because voluntary labeling already works. The recent decision by General Mills with its Cheerios product is an excellent example of voluntary labeling at work.

Mandatory labeling, on the other hand, would impose new costs on all consumers. The costs to food manufacturers of complying with mandates would be passed on to everyone — including those who can least afford higher food prices.

We and other big seed producers, I should mention, have not “spent billions of dollars defeating two state efforts to have mandatory labeling,” as the Post-Dispatch claimed. In order to prevent the confusion and uncertainty of a state-by-state patchwork of labeling laws, Monsanto contributed a total of about $13.5 million to support coalitions in California and Washington, and the total spent by others who shared our concerns was about $66 million.

Food issues are going to play a huge role in shaping the 21st century, so it’s crucial that we all have the most accurate information possible. I hope more and more people will take the opportunity to learn about these matters, and I promise that Monsanto will engage in the discussion as much as possible.
