Gary M. Sandquist: Nuclear power is still safe, reliable.

Following the Fukushima nuclear accident, anti-nuclear groups forecast the end of nuclear power in the U.S. For the risk averse, the only acceptable action now is to halt license renewals for any of the 104 operating nuclear plants in the U.S. and prevent construction of new reactors. This backlash against nuclear power is foolish and defies reality.

No energy source is risk-free. Oil rigs blowout (Gulf-2010); oil transporters spill (Exxon Valdez, 2005), natural gas and oil pipelines fail (21 in 2010, e.g., Red Butte Gardens in Utah); coal mines collapse (Crandall Canyon Mine, 2007), hydroelectric plants fail (largest Russian hydro plant, Khakassia, 2009, 75 killed), wind turbines throw blades (198 events, 1995-2010, 50 deaths), and there are nuclear accidents. So producing and utilizing any energy source involves risk. But we must have energy to sustain our standard of living and support our economy, health and welfare.

On 11 March 2011, a Richter Scale magnitude 9 earthquake, largest in the last 1,000 years in Japan, triggered tsunami waves up to 128 feet high that led to about 30,000 dead or missing. Although the Fukushima nuclear plants all shut down with the earthquake, the tsunami caused emergency electrical power loss. A cascade of problems followed including reactor fuel meltdown and hydrogen explosions releasing radiation. About 200,000 people were evacuated from communities near the plants. Although destructive and serious, it was not another Chernobyl.

Professor John D. Boice, Jr., Radiation Epidemiologist in the Department of Medicine at Vanderbilt University, testifying before the House Science Committee about Fukushima health effects said, "They were very small for Japanese workers and the public in terms of loss of life and future cancer risk in comparison to the Chernobyl disaster in 1986. Actual radiation releases from Fukushima are estimated at 10 percent of that from Chernobyl; exposure to the public was minimal in large part because of the prevailing winds and the quick action taken by Japanese authorities."

Conversely, the Chernobyl accident resulted in massive radiation exposures, both in the environment and to emergency workers fighting fires. Twenty-eight emergency workers, first responders and fire fighters, died within months of exposure. Other workers who survived later succumbed. Radioactive iodine and cesium contaminated areas in the Ukraine, Belarus and Russia and induced thyroid cancers.

The Chernobyl disaster was actually caused by improper orders from Communist Party Officers imposing unsafe experiments on an inherently unstable Soviet-designed reactor. These Communist Party actions probably contributed to the collapse of the USSR. Chernobyl (RBMK) reactors could never be licensed for commercial operation in the U.S.

However, U.S. nuclear plants have an excellent safety record. Lessons learned from Three Mile Island accident in 1979 led to changes in plant design and operation. The Fukushima accident will also yield improvements at U.S. plants, particularly in emergency preparedness and expansion of robust concrete-and-steel dry casks for storing spent fuel. Significantly, there has never been a public fatality from radiation from a nuclear power plant accident in the U.S.

This stellar safety record didn't just happen. Safety is the highest priority for U.S. regulatory agencies (NRC, EPA, OSHA, etc.) and the nuclear industry. All safety indices tracked by the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, including unplanned reactor shutdowns and worker exposure to radiation, have shown steady improvement over time.

The outstanding performance of U.S. nuclear plants can be traced to a culture of safety that began with the U.S. Nuclear Navy and continues today.

Today, nuclear-generated electricity underpins the U.S. and world economy, providing the largest emission-free source of electric power for commerce, communications, finance and trade. Most new energy-consuming devices are electric-powered and the universal use of these devices will demand electrical power.