Evolution and religious teachings complement each other.

The demographics in America show we are primarily a Christian nation, and the topic of evolution and Darwinism can be a controversial one So when discussing natural history, the approach an educator uses typically defines the success or failure of the lesson. This is where I truly believe offering students multiple viewpoints of how we as a species possibly developed will pay off. In other words, let us not forget to give both sides of the argument.

Ultimately, the goal in my history class is not to impose my personal perspective on all topics, but to give the students reasonable and accurate theories, letting them be their own “analyst” of the information. Why push our views on young adults, when we are trying to teach them to create their own? In terms of Darwinism, I explain that it makes little difference what I believe as an individual or even as an academic. It is clear that there are two sides to the question of where we come from. One is from the biblical text, the story of Adam and Eve; the other, which is subscribed to by many natural historians, is evolution from simple organisms to the 21st century version of you and me. Most of us, unfortunately, believe we have to choose sides in this debate.

Great scholars such as Jared Diamond and Charles Darwin himself, as well as many others, have provided evidence that supports evolution. These scholars discuss the domestication of large animals for human needs, including energy and food. The question I put to you is why? What provoked domestication? Why did we invent tools to hunt larger prey? These behaviors make sense when examining Darwin and his theory of evolution and natural selection. Darwin has explained to us why we took this path. Survival. The examples are without end. They range from our desire to continuously seek more resources and to our constant struggle for fame and power in modern society.

In acquiring these resources, we have a better chance of long-term survival. This seems to be a consistent and innate behavior in humans. We see elements of “survival of the fittest” in almost every creature on this earth; therefore, how can we not point this out as a possible explanation for our behaviors throughout history. Yet to ignore the spiritual side of human history is to lack objectivity both as an individual and as an educator. Once again, as a historian, the evidence is too extensive to ignore, leading us to believe that there is a high probability of our God being real. Not to mention, as a Christian, I strongly believe in him. So the question remains, how do we approach these conflicting views?

The answer in my class is that perhaps they do not conflict in the way we have always been taught. Why can we not have both? I do not push this onto my students, but the argument should not be focused on Adam and Eve vs. evolution, because there is substantial evidence for both evolution and spirituality. The two sides complement each other, if we open our mind to their plausibility. Does the combination of spirituality and an acceptance of evolution negate our chosen faith? God made us such complex beings with physical, mental, and emotional lives. Why could he not have also given us the power to evolve?