Modifying Mother Nature a Dangerous Business.

We continue to disrupt the ecological balance at our own peril.

The sky is falling! The sky is falling! Chicken Little, a.k.a., Henny Penny, predicted that the sky was falling in the classic folk tale. Luckily, disaster proved not to be the case for Chicken Little, Turkey Lurkey and Foxy Loxy.

It most definitely is not a fairy tale though, when, in modern times, increasing numbers of experts are warning of severe, irreparable, ecological damage to the Earth.

The point at which we needed to collectively get our natural fertilizer together to ensure a sustainable future for the entire planet was long ago. But it's still not too late, if — and that's a much bigger word than its two letters would imply — and only if we act now, today, this minute, to begin to reverse the steep, downward trend.

Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and antibiotic-resistant diseases are just some of the topics of the debates on where we're headed as a planet. Aug. 20 was Earth Overshoot Day, the point at which humanity exhausted Mother Nature's "budget" for the year.

The Global Footprint Network estimates that in approximately eight months, we now demand more from the Earth in natural resources than the planet can provide for in an entire year.

Unfortunately, even the most intelligent scientists and analysts, such as those at the GFN, sometimes are labeled as the Chicken Littles of our time. That character was dismissed as being hysterical and paranoid. In a similar fashion, the increasingly dire warnings of the damage we're wreaking on the ecosystem often are shrugged off as merely the blathering of liberals who are anti-business.

Man-made trumps naturally occurring, in our American way of thinking. Diseases or pests getting in the way of progress, making it difficult for us to pursue our greedy, selfish ends? There's a drug or chemical to fix that.

But the problem is, we're engaged in a lose-lose battle, because Mother Nature holds the ultimate trump cards. Are we going to be able to take off our profit-at-any-cost blinders to recognize the danger we're in, soon enough to survive?

A recent cover story in Time magazine, "A World Without Bees," addressed the role pollinators play in our global ecosystem, akin to the canary in the coal mine. That is, their precipitous population decline is a forewarning of more severe consequences to come.

This summer, the presence of neonicitinoids in fertilizers and insecticides has arisen as the latest instance of humanity's presence on the planet resulting in less than humane effects on the overall ecology. It's a complicated matter. But the essence of it is that when these chemicals get into crops that are pollinated, the pollinators absorb the substances, often with fatal results.

In an almost unbelievable twist, even one major non-pollinated crop, corn, which is self-pollinating, ultimately can be fatal for pollinators. Some of the larger honey producers will remove the supply of honey the bees have built up in their hives to last them over the winter months and replace it with corn syrup — corn syrup that contains the potentially fatal neonicitinoids.

Antibiotics such as penicillin have become largely ineffective against diseases that have built up resistance to those drugs. Some "super weeds" in agriculture, likewise, have developed immunity to virtually all herbicides.

Can the average Milwaukee consumer have any impact on these global-level problems? You bet. The Milwaukee Eat Local Challenge Sept. 1 to 14 will allow you to patronize small, local farmers and know that the food you're eating does not contain GMOs (eatlocalmilwaukee.org).

Also, do your best to avoid use of neonicitinoids and other dangerous chemicals in your own gardens (centerforfoodsafety.org). And put in as many pollinator-friendly plants as possible to broaden the food sources available to them (pollinator.org).

In sum, as Gandhi so wisely advised: "Live simply so others may simply live."

