GMO foes' Diet Rich In Irony.

Elements of the political Left seem to jettison reverence for ‘scientific consensus’ when it comes to genetically modified food.

If you had a functioning television during the past decade, you got used to the cliché: Conservatives were anti-science, either cynically rejecting scientific insights in order to better serve their corporate masters or just simply being too thick to put down their Bibles and bask in the light of sweet reason.

It was never an especially compelling case. The centerpiece of the argument was conservative skepticism about global warming, an issue on which the Left has been stretching its credibility to a breaking point in recent years. Perhaps the Left’s Chicken Littles unfairly cut into the credibility of more sober analysts, but is it any surprise that the public grows distrustful when Al Gore says there’s only 10 years left to save the planet (a pronouncement he made more than eight years ago) or when Prince Charles pronounces that humanity’s ability “to take the necessary steps to avert irretrievable climate and ecosystem collapse” will expire in July 2017? That’s more televangelism than science.

One failed prediction, of course – even a constellation of them, for that matter – isn’t definitive proof that climate change isn’t real. What those who smear climate change skeptics as “deniers” miss, however, is that the issue is infinitely more complex than simple acceptance or rejection.

Someone can believe that global warming is real, but not primarily caused by humans. One can believe that humans are the cause, but that climate change doesn’t pose a serious threat to the planet. One can believe that the threat is significant, but that solutions like a cap-and-trade system for carbon emissions create more problems than they solve. And the list goes on. Bifurcating the world into “believers” and “deniers” thus elides the considerations that are actually most important to having a coherent debate on the topic.

What makes the “anti-science” slander especially ironic, however, is that there exists today a major public policy issue on which the conversation really is binary, with the evidence overwhelmingly on one side – and it’s one on which certain members of the political Left seem to have jettisoned their reverence for “the scientific consensus.” That issue: genetically modified food.

In recent years, the environmentalist tendency to equate “natural” with good (which presumably contains exemptions for such natural phenomena as hemlock, asbestos and smallpox) has bred a pervasive skepticism about genetic modification. Connecticut and Maine have both passed laws requiring the labeling of genetically modified food (operative only once other states in the Northeast pass similar statutes). In Washington state and here in California, ballot initiatives to mandate labeling have narrowly failed.

The trend is even starting to take root in the nation’s capital, with Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., introducing legislation that would mandate such labeling requirements under federal law. (A rival group of lawmakers wants to prohibit state labeling laws and leave the decision entirely up to the federal government.)

What’s all the fuss about? Well, in truth, not much. What many on the left – and indeed, much of the wider public – don’t seem to understand is that modern genetic modification efforts aren’t especially novel; they’re just more efficient.

Human beings have bred plant and animal species, in order to cultivate specific traits, from the earliest days of civilization. Indeed, one of the hallmarks of human progress has been the ability to alter natural resources to better fit the needs of society. All genetic modification does is cut out the middleman, allowing advancements to be made in huge leaps through precision engineering rather than through the painstaking incrementalism that results from generations of selective breeding.

Yet some of the very same people who preach the gospel of science when it comes to issues like climate change react to genetically modified organisms with pre-Enlightenment paranoia.

The critics generally rely on the fear of the unknown, referring to genetic modification practices as “untested” and warning that we don’t know enough about the health risks involved. It’s not the practice of genetic modification that’s novel, however – it’s just the public awareness of it.

Last fall, a team of Italian biologists hoping to create a central resource for citizens curious about the impact of GMOs compiled the results of 1,783 scientific studies done from 2002-12. The results: They wrote, “The scientific research conducted so far has not detected any significant hazards directly connected with the use of genetically engineered crops.”

Similarly, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences has declared, after billions of servings of GMO food, that, “To date, no adverse health effects attributed to genetic engineering have been documented in the human population.”

Indeed, the operative question may be whether GMOs are overregulated. Despite a flawless record of safety, the regulatory hurdles to getting GMO food to market are enormous. As the Competitive Enterprise Institute’s Gregory Conko recently noted, “It takes an average of five to 10 years to develop and test a crop for consumer and environmental safety. This is followed by an additional two to four years of review by the Food and Drug Administration, Department of Agriculture, and Environmental Protection Agency.

“And because most American farmers will not plant genetically modified crops they cannot export to global markets in Europe, Asia and South America, the wait is even longer in order to secure approval overseas,” Conko wrote. The average regulatory cost of getting a genetically modified plant to market? By Conko’s estimates, it runs more than $35 million.

These concerns are not abstract. GMOs literally have the potential to save lives. Consider the example of Norman Borlaug, the agronomist who won a Nobel Prize for his work altering wheat so that it could generate higher yields, better resist diseases, and more effectively adapt to growing conditions. Those efforts revolutionized agriculture in Mexico, Pakistan and India, warding off the scourge of starvation.

As the resolution accompanying his 2006 Congressional Gold Medal noted, “Dr. Borlaug … saved more lives than any other person who has ever lived, and likely … saved more lives in the Islamic world than any other human being in history.”

While Borlaug’s initial efforts were done through conventional breeding, subsequent advances along similar lines have utilized genetic modification techniques. Borlaug himself (who died in 2009) warned of the potentially devastating effect that criticism of that work could have, noting, “If the naysayers do manage to stop agricultural biotechnology, they might actually precipitate the famines and the crisis of global biodiversity they have been predicting for nearly 40 years.”

That’s the bigger issue. Considered narrowly, GMO labeling may be relatively harmless, albeit superfluous (those producers who don’t utilize genetic modification, after all, already go out of their way to advertise that fact). The real danger, however, lies in the prospect that labeling will only further accelerate the irrational stigmatization of technology that is, at worst, benign and, at best, life-saving.

Given those stakes, it would be nice if those committed to the concept of “settled science” could spare a moment of their time in defense of the practice. Superstition ought not to be excused just because it breaks out among your allies.
