Column: Leave vaccine science to the doctors.

In a few years, my 10-year-old daughter will be facing not the sexual revolution but the human papilloma virus epidemic. I will be asking her pediatrician to give her the HPV vaccine, not necessarily at the age of 11 or 12 as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends, but before I believe she will become sexually active.

As a practicing internist, I also strongly recommend this vaccine for all my teenage female patients.

So pardon me as I request that Americans continue to receive medical wisdom from folks who actually dabble in, well, medicine, and not from the likes of Rep. Michele Bachmann, R-Minn., or Texas Gov. Rick Perry, both of whom are seeking the presidency.

Much has been written, and said, about Bachmann disparaging the use of this invaluable vaccine, as well as her obsessively taking to task Perry for his flip-flop over mandating the vaccine for young girls in Texas. This political combat, though, could have collateral damage: the undermining of all vaccines.

It's bad enough that actors such as Jim Carrey and Jenny McCarthy recklessly push misinformation about the ties of childhood vaccines to autism. We can write that off as Hollywood nonsense. But when our most powerful political actors get into the game, we're entering the danger zone.

For one, the HPV vaccine is safe. It is manufactured using virus-like particles and genetic technology to cause the body to make antibodies against the virus.

More than 35 million doses have been administered since 2006 when Gardasil, the first version, was approved, and neither the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System nor the CDC's Vaccine Safety Datalink Project have proved any significant negative outcomes linked to the vaccine. Studies also show that the vaccine does not lead to an increase in sexual activity, as some parents fear.

No matter how safe, though, because vaccinations involve putting a foreign substance into the body, fear is a common emotional reaction, and fearful people become susceptible to misinformation attached to political agendas.

Consider that nearly one in five Americans still believe that vaccines cause autism, even though multiple studies have shown no link. Such fear of vaccines leads to a lack of compliance, which has caused the resurgence of several diseases in the U.S. and the United Kingdom, including measles and mumps. 

Meanwhile, it is vaccines that stamped out smallpox, gained control over polio and help battle influenza every year.

Though Bachmann tried to explain away her comments in a recent debate by saying that she was simply passing along a mother's comments about the HPV vaccine, the damage had been done. The American public was left with a residue of worry: Is the vaccine safe, or isn't it? Vaccine fear-mongers had been given another gift.

Mistrust of the vaccine is tragic when you consider that HPV is an epidemic that afflicts more than 20 million people in the U.S. (more than 6 million new cases per year), and leads to cervical cancer as well as growing numbers of throat and anal cancer.

Having sex is elective, so I believe the vaccine should be elective, too. But mandatory or not, it is clear that in order to gain control of a rapidly spreading disease, an effective vaccine against it must be used widely.

My daughter will get this vaccine. Yours should too, though that decision is ultimately between you, your daughter and your doctor — not a politician playing one on TV.