Nuclear energy: Benefits greatly outweigh risks.

Most of us think about South Florida as a world-class tourist destination filled with mega-yachts and celebrities. But how many realize we have two nuclear power plants?

One of them is located near Homestead. Since 1972, and operated by Florida Power & Light, the Turkey Point Generating Station has two pressurized water nuclear reactors capable of generating nearly 700 megawatts of power each. In light of the nuclear catastrophe in Japan, we must ask ourselves: How safe are we? Is the price of nuclear energy worth the risk?

While there is no such thing as 100 percent safe, having nuclear energy is much safer than you think. It's thousands of times safer than conventional coal and other fossil-fuel-derived energy, not to mention the specter of environmental disaster from continued use of carbon-based energy sources. In fact, it's safer than rooftop solar panels.

However, we cannot be complacent about safety. We must learn from mistakes made in Japan and elsewhere.

The Turkey Point reactors have an excellent safety record, with only two incidents rated as serious. In a 1974 test, the emergency feedwater pumps failed to operate. In 1986, a turbine malfunction occurred and the reactor control rods did not deploy properly. Neither incident led to releases of radioactive materials.

However, improvement is needed to ensure continued safe nuclear power. Foremost is the need for stricter regulation of plant operations by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. We need to increase governmental oversight to a level comparable to that of the Transportation Safety Administration at airports. Strict guidelines prohibiting personal interactions or employment agreements between the regulators and operators of nuclear power plants must be enacted and enforced.

Another critically needed safeguard is better whistleblower protection. In 2001, a nuclear inspector reported serious safety problems at the Fukushima Daiichi plant to government regulators. The government regulators revealed his name to the plant's operators, resulting in his being blackballed from the Japanese nuclear industry.

In the United States, the Research Triangle Institute reported more than two-thirds of whistleblowers suffered adverse effects on their careers for doing the right thing.

The largest hurdle, though, is nuclear waste. A major contributor to the Fukushima Daiichi disaster was the spent fuel stored in cooling ponds that was not adequately contained. We must develop a mechanism for safely disposing of the large amounts of spent nuclear fuel stored at plants.

Presently, the anti-nuclear alarmists are having a field-day decrying nuclear power. The governments of Japan and Germany have turned decidedly anti-nuclear power. What is missing from today's anti-nuclear argument is an honest, objective risk/benefit analysis of nuclear power.

Currently, the only viable alternatives to nuclear power are coal and other fossil fuels. Our plans to wean ourselves from dependence on foreign oil are primarily directed to increased reliance on electric power: what we derive from nuclear energy.

Wind, solar and geothermal cannot come close to meeting our energy needs. Research to develop viable alternative energies is desperately needed, but is falling victim to the ax of budget hawks.

Nuclear power has risks, but they are outweighed by the benefits. In South Florida, nuclear power has, and can continue to be, our best choice for safe, domestically produced, environmentally friendly energy.