No worries at St. Lucie nuclear plants. Really?

The cozy “Energy Encounter” conference room at the St. Lucie Nuclear Power Plant is reassuring. A life-sized cardboard cutout of Albert Einstein, sketched in slacks and a bright green argyle sweater, and a cartoon parrot in a pirate suit lean against the front wall, behind the six officials.

The 40 people gathered to hear the NRC’s safety report on St. Lucie’s two nuclear reactors include Hutchinson Island, Martin and St. Lucie residents, a contingent of young people in t-shirts, dreadlocks and backwards baseball caps from Palm Beach County Environmental Coalition, and 80-year-old Stan Smilan, retired airline pilot and longtime nuclear industry critic from Lake Worth.

The three Florida Power & Light Co. employees and three federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission spokesmen speak as one. Their message is upbeat: Nuclear power is safe. The St. Lucie plant reactors, spent fuel pools and power systems are safe. What happened in Japan won’t, can’t, and never will happen here.

Sure, the St. Lucie plant has had problems, but the problems have been fixed. Yes, an earthquake did happen in Haiti, but it’s extremely unlikely here. True, the plant did lose all off-site power during Hurricane Jeanne, but “ran on diesel generators just fine.”

And yes, there have been problems with FPL employees being afraid to report problems to the NRC, but now they can provide anonymous tips on telephone hotlines.

The NRC is studying what went wrong in Japan and will apply anything it learns to nuclear plants in the U.S.

All the FPL and NRC folks are excruciatingly polite, even when questions are rude or heated.

I covered the St. Lucie plant from 1979 through the mid-80s. Back then, the story was that the reactors would last 30-40 years, then be taken out of service. The NRC spokesmen now say the two —one 34 years old, the other 28 — are inspected often and aging parts replaced as needed. During President George W. Bush’s administration, nuclear plants were allowed to renew their licenses for 20 more years even if their current licenses had not run out, and the St. Lucie nukes did that.

What about the dangerous-forever nuclear waste? One PR dude used to get poetic about that. “Our grandchildren, will figure out what to do with it. They will discover some wonderful way to use it.”

Of course that has not happened. On-site storage, in pools for the newest “hot” waste and in concrete casks for the older waste, is today’s reality, and no wonderful solution is in sight.

The bureaucrats pass the buck when a woman asks about potassium iodide pills. The pills don’t protect against all radiation, but taken within a few hours of exposure, fill the thyroid and prevent thyroid cancer.

They’re no panacea; they’re what to take while driving away.

FPL and the NRC know nothing; distributing pills is a county responsibility.

Former St. Lucie Commissioner Charles Grande is shocked. “Most of us,” he said, “assumed the NRC would have some standards and oversight.”

Later, St. Lucie Health Department official Clint Sperber explains in a phone interview that enough potassium iodide is available for the 260,000 people who live within a 10-mile radius of the plant.

Hospitals and nursing homes have it stashed for people who can’t easily leave. Martin, Palm Beach, Indian River and Brevard have a lot of it, because they are “host counties” for people fleeing. But where will people get the pills?

Public information officers will tell people where to get them, Mr. Sperber said, if a radiation release is imminent. (Individuals also can Google “nuke pills” to order their own for about $10.)

No plans have been made for what to do if the emergency area expands to a 50-mile radius, as it has in Japan.

Even the Palm Beach Conservation group unfurling an anti-nuke banner in the meeting room can’t dampen the FPL and NRC folks’ cheery insistence that there are no problems in St. Lucie’s nuke world. The industry reps and the regulators sit at separate tables, but they’re all such good buddies. It’s tough to tattle on a pal. That is — and always has been— a problem.

Japan’s horror show is a reminder that the debate on nuclear safety is not over. A generation later, it begins again.