My Word: U.S. nuclear energy reliable and safe.

On the first anniversary this month of the events at Fukushima in Japan, we must remember that about 19,000 people were killed by the earthquake and tsunami, while no one has been killed by the nuclear events at Fukushima. Nuclear-plant safety has always been a high priority in the U.S., mandated by regulations, and reinforced by plant operators who understand that safe plants are efficient plants.

This safety approach has worked very well in the U.S. Although the accident at Three Mile Island in 1979 resulted in no harm to the public or workers, the nuclear utilities created the Institute of Nuclear Power operations as an independent industrial watchdog organization that conducts in-depth technical reviews of all the U.S. nuclear-power plants to ensure that we never have a similar event in the U.S.

Additionally, government regulation by theU.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission has added to ensuring the safe operation of all American nuclear-power plants.

Throughout the world, the U.S. system of nuclear-plant safety oversight and regulation is looked upon as a model. Nonetheless, the U.S. constantly pursues continuous improvement. The recent events at Fukushima will provide even more lessons that will help us improve our plants even further.

Florida's successful history with nuclear energy spans five decades. The plans for new plants here are based on the Florida history of successful and safe nuclear operations. The five reactors operating in Florida account for more than 10 percent of the electricity generated in the state.

Nuclear energy produces essentially no air pollution or greenhouse gases. If fossil fuels replaced nuclear-generated power in Florida, it would result in additional emissions of 17,000 tons of sulfur dioxides, 9,000 tons of nitrous oxides and 15 million tons of carbon dioxide, the proposed leading source of climate change.

Nationally, 104 nuclear-power plants provide 20 percent of our electricity and 73 percent of America's zero-carbon-emission electricity — the largest of all non-emitting sources.

In the anniversary month of Fukushima, nuclear power in the United States stands upon its record of safety, reliability and performance, which has been outstanding.