Can we believe in an intelligent designer?

Several letters have been printed in response to the June 17 Tribune article on "Secularists Spreading the Word To Skip Church." Mr. Tom Quinlan of Romeoville writes that as a result of "the remarkable design of the human body or the nature of a single atom, there is an obvious, undeniable order present. And the question becomes, is it more reasonable to ascribe all this order to chaos or design, to accident or intelligence?" I myself am having a few problems with the notion of intelligent design by an omnipotent deity.

(1) What is the need for the extremes of temperature that we endure? Do we need 90-degree days in the summers and zero and below in the winters? Perhaps we need the four seasons, but would not an intelligent designer be content with 70s in the summer and 30s in the winter? (2) Why do we need to have unlimited free will in order not to be robots? Could we not have been given free will for everything in our lives except for committing murder, wars, rape, incest and pedophilia? An intelligent designer would have wisely limited our free will in these few respects, and this would not have turned us into mere robots. (3) Below the surface, our earth is composed of tectonic plates, and unfortunately these shift under each other and may even break, and this is the major cause of earthquakes. Would not an intelligent designer have chosen a better design for our planet than tectonic plates? (4) Why do we suffer from hurricanes, tornados, tsunamis, floods, mudslides, and other natural disasters? If there were an intelligent designer, would he really have created these or allowed them to happen?

(5) Why do we need to have terrible diseases like cancer, pneumonia, and others, and then have to educate and train doctors to try to cure them? Would it not have been more intelligent design not to have such diseases in the first place? (6) One of the major unintelligent designs was the placement in males of the prostate gland around the urethra, making it difficult to urinate as we grow older and as the prostate gland enlarges and presses against the urethra. Biologists agree that it would have been much wiser and intelligent had the designer placed the prostate gland next to the urethra instead of around it, but apparently the designer just didn't think it through. (7) One of the prime examples of chaos and unintelligent design is our curved spine. Before we fully evolved, we walked on all fours, and our backbone was horizontal and straight just under the top of our back, and it easily held all the muscles and organs suspended from it in the body. But eventually we became human and stood up on two legs, and the weight of our muscles and organs hanging from our now vertical backbone caused our spine to curve in order to support them. But this curvature has caused us all kinds of backache problems and herniated disks. An intelligent designer would have designed us humans differently, would we not think?

(8) Finally, an intelligent person or designer who makes mistakes would have noticed these errors, quickly stepped in, and corrected them. If I am a foreman on an assembly line and notice that the manufacturing of a product is flawed and is not working, I would stop the line, correct the problem, and then start up again. But if the universe has a designer, that designer simply refuses to notice and correct all the errors of unintelligent design that I have mentioned above. Were he an intelligent and all-powerful designer, he would have noticed these errors, stepped in, and corrected them. But I guess he refuses to do so. So I have to conclude that there is not an obvious, undeniable order present, based on intelligent design, as Mr. Quinlan tells us, but rather the total absence of such an intelligent designer. Things came to be because they came to be, and I myself am content to leave it at that.