The Front Burner: Promote carbon-free power to counter climate change.

Will we cope with the serious energy dilemma posed by climate change, or will we simply put it off until another time?

The answer may shape our economy and way of life for decades. It could begin to emerge in the effort to make the government's loan-guarantee program a workable financing platform for nuclear power and other low-carbon energy technologies so we will be able to meet a growing demand for electricity without loading the atmosphere with greenhouse-gas emissions.

The Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorizes the Department of Energy to issue loan guarantees for advanced nuclear-power projects that reduce greenhouse emissions. So far two new 1,100-megawatt Westinghouse reactors under construction at the Southern Company's Vogtle nuclear plant near Waynesboro, Ga., have received conditional approval for $8.3 billion in loan guarantees, subject to further negotiations with DOE. A uranium enrichment plant in Idaho has also gotten a conditional loan guarantee.

Government loan guarantees help energy companies obtain low-cost debt financing from private financial institutions for projects with high capital costs that otherwise might be too expensive to build. In exchange for a guarantee, DOE charges companies a fee that covers the estimated budgetary cost. With lower borrowing costs on a multibillion-dollar project, electricity users can benefit significantly.

In calling for a "new generation" of nuclear plants, President Obama has proposed tripling the level of loan guarantees to help build more reactors. What's most important is timing. Many studies show the need to curb carbon dioxide and other greenhouse emissions right now and not to wait indefinitely. The potential cost from runaway atmospheric warming or rising sea levels and storms could be astronomical. Policies based on proven technology and sound economics implemented today to reduce emissions in the United States and other countries would be prudent insurance against the possibility of irreversible climate change that could trigger disasters.

The good news is that we are seeing some progress. At the end of last year, the U.S. economy was much larger than it was in 1996; yet its carbon emissions were the same. And a number of other countries are making good-faith efforts to cut emissions.

However you regard renewable-energy sources — and I am enthusiastic about solar power — we need to be realistic about their input. Renewable sources cannot be scaled up soon enough to meet the goal for carbon mitigation. Today solar and wind power combined supply less than 2 percent of U.S. energy.

As for natural gas, it has 50 percent of coal's carbon content. For now, replacing coal with natural gas is producing positive results. But in the long term, whatever gains have been achieved will be nullified by increasing emissions from gas plants, and we will be back to square one.

By contrast, nuclear power accounts for two-thirds of our country's carbon-free energy. And the U.S. fleet of 100 nuclear plants is at the vanguard of a global clean-energy transformation which, if allowed to continue, will show that things can change for the better, and relatively quickly.

Since 1990, the U.S. nuclear industry has invested more than $90 billion in capital expenditures to improve and upgrade its fleet of power plants. Those improvements have helped yield a 33 percent increase in nuclear-generated electricity production over that period.