Don't be in a hurry to replace state's nuclear plants.

It has been interesting to see the recent calls for replacement of nuclear energy facilities with plants that use fossil fuels. We've heard it from anti-nuclear activists, journalists, some academics and even a few politicians. We should be cautious of these hasty demands and consider the consequences.

Most people who are well informed about the relationship between energy and the environment know that nuclear energy facilities are the only type of large-scale electricity supply that emits zero carbon or other greenhouse gasses. 

Over the past four decades in Florida, we have had five nuclear reactors providing as much as 20 percent to as little as 12 percent (currently) of our state's electricity. Had fossil fuel plants generated that electricity, the difference would have been more than one trillion tons of carbon dioxide emitted into our air. 

Florida's nuclear facilities reduced fossil fuel usage by the equivalent of 5 trillion barrels of oil or 30 quintillion BTU of natural gas (that's 30 trillion million).  Moreover, nuclear energy saved about $250 billion in avoided fossil fuel purchases, which was a cost that Floridians would have had to pay.

According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, nuclear energy facilities have been responsible for nearly half of the total voluntary reductions in greenhouse gas emissions reported by U.S. companies. Nuclear plants help regions meet air pollution standards.

While these statistics may not be important to some, the absence of zero-emission nuclear plants would have impacts that affect others in disproportionate ways. Society has become more aware that adverse environmental and health impacts hit minority populations hardest. 

The group Physicians for Social Responsibility has stated, "While air pollution adversely affects the entire U.S. population – children, the elderly, and people suffering from chronic illness are particularly vulnerable. Compared to adults, children spend more time out of doors, breathe more rapidly, and inhale more pollutants per pound of body weight. The elderly are more susceptible to air pollution because their immune systems are weakened by age and they often suffer from one or more chronic illnesses. Poor and minority communities also are disproportionately affected by air pollution because they often are situated closer to pollution sources."

This growing recognition has helped us begin factoring disproportionate impacts into our decisions about power plants. In 1997, for example, the Florida Legislature created the Environmental Equity and Justice Commission, the purpose of this group was "…to determine the disproportionate and cumulative concentration of environmental hazards in people of color and low-income communities, to assess how Florida can best address these inequities…with emphasis on future prevention…taking into account the greater degree of risk to which such communities may be exposed."

There is much debate about nuclear energy throughout Florida right now.  Some of the attention stems from well-staged campaigns by anti-nuclear activists.  Some of it centers on a legitimate discussion amongst lawmakers about the best way to finance necessary nuclear facilities that are large and take long periods of time to build.  There has been a temporary spike in the public interest on this topic following the recent decision by Duke Energy to retire the Crystal River Nuclear Plant after 29 years of operation.  

This public conversation is healthy, but let's make sure we get the facts and the conclusions right. Be especially cautious of erratic proposals to replace nuclear facilities with fossil fuel plants or risky schemes to repeal current financing laws that would kill any chances for future emission-free nuclear facilities. 