Nuclear is good investment for economy, environment and energy security.

In recent weeks, the press has been filled with articles about America's nuclear revival. For example, Duke Energy, Entergy, NRG, Luminant, Progress Energy, TVA and other power companies have announced plans to add several dozen nuclear plants to their generation mix over the next decade. But will these plans materialize?

Let's hope so. Though the U.S. has 104 nuclear plants operating in 31 states, no new facilities have been ordered since the 1970s. Still, those 104 plants currently generate about one-fifth of the nation's electricity while emitting no greenhouse gases. By contrast, the nation's 600 coal-fired plants produce 36 percent of all U.S. greenhouse emissions and nearly 10 percent of the world's. And though oil imports have dropped slightly due to the current recession, the U.S. remains hostage to foreign suppliers for a huge percentage of our energy needs.

Though renewables such as wind and solar have commanded much attention of late, the reality is that only nuclear power can provide the sheer volume of reliable base-load electricity our nation will need to sustain economic growth while at the same time meeting the challenges of climate change.

A decade ago, objections from environmentalists were the principal roadblocks to new plant construction. But most of the concerns over safety and waste disposal have been allayed while the environmental lobby now acknowledges that nuclear power generation is environmentally benign. Today, the potential hold-up to new plant construction is the availability of financing. In the current economic climate, industry executives are concerned that banks and Wall Street will not provide the money needed to build new reactors unless the loans are guaranteed by the federal government.

Under the Energy Policy Act of 2005, nuclear power is eligible for loan guarantees since it is considered a "clean" technology that doesn't emit carbon gases. To date, Congress has authorized a maximum of $18.5 billion in guarantees for nuclear power projects; and earlier this year, the U.S. Department of Energy selected four pilot nuclear plants to receive these guarantees. But an additional $90 billion has been requested by 17 companies wishing to build 26 new reactors.

The 2009 American Clean Energy and Security Act (Waxman-Markey), approved by the U.S. House of Representatives in June, would provide loan guarantees and other financial incentives for nuclear power and other advanced technologies. But the act also includes a provision prohibiting any one energy source from obtaining more than 30 percent of the loan guarantees. Because the cost of a nuclear plant is high compared to the size and financing capability of most U.S. electric companies, this provision could impede the industry's planned expansion.

Unlike the House bill, a measure passed by the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee would not impose percentage limits on any particular energy source for loan guarantees. Instead, the Senate bill would create a Clean Energy Development Administration to funnel loan guarantees to viable nuclear, wind and solar projects.

Unlike other federal loan guarantee programs, project developers are required to pay the full cost of the loan guarantee as well as the cost of administering the program.

Investing in new nuclear power plants is good for the economy, good for the environment and good for energy security. But to ensure that America's nuclear renaissance isn't derailed, members should reject the House restriction on loan guarantees for nuclear energy when the bill reaches the Senate floor.

Bernard Weinstein will become associate director of the Maguire Energy Institute in the Cox School of Business at Southern Methodist University in September.