Nuclear energy too risky when efficiency works.

There is no silver bullet solution to global warming. We must take a hard look at the costs and benefits of all energy sources needed to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. But there's one so-called solution that is too risky for America.

Some are calling for a "nuclear renaissance." But there's a reason no plants have been constructed in more than 30 years - the high costs and risks, especially relative to cheaper, cleaner and safer alternatives such as renewables and energy efficiency. Our children deserve a solution to global warming that goes beyond trading one bad idea for another.

To date, no country has solved the waste storage issue. What about the French? The truth is that the reprocessing center at La Hague is extremely expensive to operate, doesn't eliminate the need to store vitrified and intermediate waste, and radioactive materials from the facility are released into the English Channel. Recently, both Nevada's Yucca Mountain and Wisconsin's Wolf River batholith were removed from consideration as storage facilities. The question remains, where will we safely store the 20 tons of highly radioactive spent nuclear fuel and additional low-level waste that every nuclear reactor produces annually?

Lest we forget - an accident at a coal plant or a wind farm is bad but generally manageable. But an accident or terrorist attack at a nuclear plant can be catastrophic. A Union of Concerned Scientist study found that a successful attack on New York's Indian Point nuclear plant, as was originally planned by the Sept. 11 hijackers, could result in more than 43,700 immediate fatalities and 518,000 cancer deaths, and cost more than $2 trillion to clean up.

In 2008, Bloomberg News reported that estimates for building a nuclear power plant range from $6 billion to $12 billion. The Congressional Budget Office assumes that half of all loans to nuclear power projects will default. Taking on this liability would not be prudent in the current economic climate.

Nuclear power is not carbon neutral. In fact, a "life cycle" analysis by Benjamin K. Sovacool found that the processes of uranium mining and enrichment, nuclear plant construction and dismantling, and long-term radioactive waste storage results in 16-55 grams of CO2/kWh, compared to only 11-37 grams of CO2/kWh with wind power.

Why spend billions on nuclear? Energy efficiency remains the cheapest, fastest and cleanest source of energy. An analysis of a federal energy efficiency resources standard (EERS) shows the potential for saving money and reducing fossil fuel consumption. The EERS would require electric utilities to reach 15% electricity savings and 10% natural gas savings by 2020. Energy saved through the proposed EERS could power about 48 million households by 2020. This will save Americans almost $170 billion in energy costs, create over 220,000 jobs, reduce emissions by 262 million metric tons and eliminate the equivalent of 390 power plants.

We're already seeing progress. Milwaukee County is taking steps to improve building efficiency. Upgrading light fixtures, installing efficient lighting, and efficient heating and cooling will save over $3 million a year for the county courthouse alone over the next decade, according to Honeywell.

Don't just take Sierra Club's word for it. Last week, when asked about new coal and nuclear plants, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Chairman David Wellinghoff said, "we may not need any ever." Wellinghoff said renewables like wind, solar and biomass will provide enough energy to meet baseload capacity and future demands. He added, "People talk about, 'Oh, we need baseload.' It's like people saying we need more computing power, we need mainframes. We don't need mainframes, we have distributed computing."

This analogy is all too apropos. Solving global warming requires true innovation and investments in efficiency, not the antiquated energy solutions of the past.