How we became U.S. climate migrants.

My husband and I are climate change disaster survivors. Following our federal scientists' work on Third National Climate Assessment, we want to share our story. We hope the NCA release, along with our firsthand account, will help others realize climate change is happening here in the United States and will likely get worse.

My husband and I had our first climate shock years ago while scrambling up a steep gorge to ice-climb a frozen waterfall. To our shock, the waterfall wasn't there. We looked and couldn't find a trickle of water, let alone ice. Later, while we were backpacking in the Rocky Mountains, a ranger warned us to watch for falling dead trees. As we hiked, it was so hot. There was no shade, and all the trees were dead from pine beetle infestation and drought. Instead of feeling joy, we were fearful of a possible wildfire.

The fires did come, and we lost our home to the High Park Fire, one of many recent drought-driven forest fires that have plagued Colorado.

The summer we lost our home, the heat was record-breaking. The hills glowed at night with flames. The fires destroyed 259 homes, and one woman died. It was 21 days before we were allowed to visit the site where our home had stood. Experts reported unprecedented fire behavior. It was so hot, the soil was sterilized deeper than a "normal" fire, and it would take longer for the forest to grow back. The sterilization and drying out of the land also exacerbates the risks.

Scared by the dangers of climate change, my husband and I decided to move to the Pacific Northwest. As we drove the northern route in mid-September, fires burned in every state. I wept as we drove. We were leaving stable jobs and friends who supported us for a cooler place where it rains. We became climate change refugees.

Since then, I have dedicated myself to curbing human-caused climate change and am shocked at how little action the U.S. population has taken. The carbon we produce from burning fossil fuels is forming a thick blanket around the Earth. A forest fire is a double-edged sword, adding carbon as it burns and killing plant life that, if alive, would absorb carbon. The reality is that global warming is happening faster than many experts predicted and faster than many species can adjust. It is causing all kinds of strange weather patterns: storms and floods, followed by droughts and fires.

Scientists who wrote the National Climate Assessment confirm warming and its impact. In recent decades, the Southwest has been hotter than during any period in the last 600 years. Future droughts in the Colorado River Basin will be more frequent, intense and longer than at any point in the historical record. This will have a severe effect on the region's agriculture, affecting millions of Coloradans.

I'm embarrassed that my country lags behind other nations in addressing this challenge. My husband and I wish Americans would move past debating the well-established science of human-caused climate change and focus on implementing solutions. We cannot stand by and wait for scientists and engineers to find solutions, God to unfold a plan or policymakers to enact a new law. We must take a hard look at our lives and work together to stop further damage and create a safer future.