Nuclear energy = green jobs, economic growth in Fla., beyond.

We all know how critical Florida is to the outcome of this year's election. This week, as Orlando hosts the annual conference of the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, all eyes are on the presidential candidates as they speak to Hispanic elected officials — and by extension, to their constituents — about the issues that are top of mind for voters.

Notably, the conference addresses two issues also of paramount concern to all Floridians: energy and the economy.

From our perspective, these issues are deeply intertwined — and one way that Floridians and the state's thriving Hispanic community can advocate for economic growth through renewed investment in clean energy is by supporting nuclear energy. We need to let the candidates know that Americans are relying on the next president for clean, sustainable energy policies that benefit us all.

As we look toward diversifying America's energy portfolio and building out the energy generated by renewables, candidates should look to nuclear energy as one proven way to effectively meet growing demand. In doing so, they are registering their support for well-paying jobs, sustained economic growth and clean, affordable energy options.

Florida is one of many states exploring opportunities to expand capacity at existing facilities, which would mean the creation of new jobs and added economic impact. By showing our support for Florida's five nuclear-energy reactors, as well as paving the way for the expansion of the infrastructure that supports them in the state and beyond, we can help create and sustain green jobs and work to reduce unemployment.

Florida needs jobs. While overall U.S. unemployment rates stand at 8.2 percent, unemployment in Florida is slightly higher, at 8.6 percent. National unemployment among Hispanics is higher still, at 11 percent.

At present, the U.S. nuclear-energy industry supports 100,000 American jobs. Each new nuclear facility creates an average of 1,400 to 1,800 high-paying jobs, often reaching as many as 3,500 jobs during peak construction periods. Once operational, these facilities create 400 to 700 direct and permanent jobs.

What does this all mean for minorities, who are so disproportionately impacted by unemployment?

Latinos in Florida will be able to take advantage of contract opportunities set aside for minority development programs. And Florida's communities will provide the goods and services needed to support a growing nuclear-energy industry. Recent trends in entrepreneurship indicate business starts in the Hispanic community will continue at a much higher rate than in other communities. Hispanic communities are therefore readily able to address the growing needs of new nuclear facilities.

Educational institutions across the state are also targeting minority populations with training programs designed to produce nuclear work-force-ready candidates. These programs and partnerships are cropping up at minority-serving institutions statewide.

Take, for example, Miami Dade College's Nuclear-Career Academic Bridge, which leverages a combination of financial aid, mentorships and focused, skills-oriented training to ready students to enter the nuclear industry upon completion of the program.

These kinds of efforts — which expose Hispanic students in greater numbers to critical science, technology, engineering and mathematics education — not only promote greater diversity in the energy work force, but also put Hispanic students in line to enter well-paying careers in an industry with a bright future.

Just as nuclear power creates and sustains jobs, it also promotes healthy economic growth. Each of America's 104 nuclear-power facilities generates, on average, $430 million in economic output annually, as well as an additional $40 million per year in total labor income. Minority-owned suppliers and businesses are among key beneficiaries of this economic infusion.

Indeed, all eyes will be on the candidates speaking at the Orlando conference this week. And clearly the candidates will be keenly focused on the Hispanic community. They're looking to the more than 1 million potential voters that Florida's Hispanic population represents for cues on how to shape their policies and platforms.